INTRODUCTION



 : ON SCIENTIFIC
COGNITION


1. It is customary to preface a work with an explanation of
the author’s aim, why he wrote the book, and the relationship
in which he believes it to stand to other earlier or contemporary
treatises on the same subject. In the case of a philosophical
work, however, such an explanation seems not only superfluous
but, in view of the nature of the subject-matter, even inappro¬
priate and misleading. For whatever might appropriately be
said about philosophy in a preface—say a historical statement
of the main drift and the point of view, the general content and
results, a string of random assertions and assurances about
truth—none of this can be accepted as the way in which to
expound philosophical truth. Also, since philosophy moves
essentially in the element of universality, which includes within
itself the particular, it might seem that here more than in any
of the other sciences the subject-matter itself, and even in its
complete nature, were expressed in the aim and the final results,
the execution being by contrast really the unessential factor. On
the other hand, in the ordinary view of anatomy, for instance
(say, the knowledge of the parts of the body regarded as inani¬
mate), we are quite sure that we do not as yet possess the sub¬
ject-matter itself, the content of this science, but must in addi¬
tion exert ourselves to know the particulars. Further, in the case
of such an aggregate of information, which has no right to bear
the name of Science, an opening talk about aim and other such
generalities is usually conducted in the same historical and un¬
comprehending way in which the content itself (these nerves,
muscles, etc.) is spoken of. In the case of philosophy, on the
other hand, this would give rise to the incongruity that along
with the employment of such a method its inability to grasp
the truth would also be demonstrated.

2. Furthermore, the very attempt to define how a philo¬
sophical work is supposed to be connected with other efforts
to deal with the same subject-matter drags in an extraneous
concern, and what is really important for the cognition of the

truth is obscured. The more conventional opinion gets fixated
on the antithesis of truth and falsity, the more it tends to expect
a given philosophical system to be either accepted or con¬
tradicted; and hence it finds only acceptance or rejection. It
does not comprehend the diversity of philosophical systems as
the progressive unfolding of truth, but rather sees in it simple
disagreements. The bud disappears in the bursting-forth of the
blossom, and one might say that the former is refuted by the
latter; similarly, when the fruit appears, the blossom is shown
up in its turn as a false manifestation of the plant, and the fruit
now emerges as the truth of it instead. These forms are not just
distinguished from one another, they also supplant one another
as mutually incompatible. Yet at the same time their fluid
nature makes them moments of an organic unity in which they
not only do not conflict, but in which each is as necessary as
the other; and this mutual necessity alone constitutes the life
of the whole. But he who rejects a philosophical system [i.e.
the new philosopher] does not usually comprehend what he is
doing in this way; and he who grasps the contradiction between
them [i.e. the historian of philosophy] does not, as a general
rule, know how to free it from its one-sidedness, or maintain
it in its freedom by recognizing the reciprocally necessary
moments that take shape as a conflict and seeming incompati¬
bility.

3. Demanding and supplying these [superficial] explana¬
tions passes readily enough as a concern with what is essential.
Where could the inner meaning of a philosophical work find
fuller expression than in its aims and results, and how could
these be more exactly known than by distinguishing them from
everything else the age brings forth in this sphere? Yet when
this activity is taken for more than the mere beginnings of cogni¬
tion, when it is allowed to pass for actual cognition, then it
should be reckoned as no more than a device for evading the
real issue [die Sache selbst ], a way of creating an impression of
hard work and serious commitment to the problem, while actu¬
ally sparing oneself both. For the real issue is not exhausted
by stating it as an aim, but by carrying it out, nor is the result
the actual whole, but rather the result together with the process
through which it came about. The aim by itself is a lifeless uni¬
versal, just as the guiding tendency is a mere drive that as yet

lacks an actual existence; and the bare result is the corpse which
has left the guiding tendency behind it. Similarly, the specific
difference of a thing is rather its limit; it is where the thing
stops, or it is what the thing is not. This concern with aim or
results, with differentiating and passing judgement on various
thinkers is therefore an easier task than it might seem. For in¬
stead of getting involved in the real issue, this kind of activity
is always away beyond it; instead of tarrying with it, and losing
itself in it, this kind of knowing is forever grasping at something
new; it remains essentially preoccupied with itself instead of
being preoccupied with the real issue and surrendering to it.
To judge a thing that has substance and solid worth is quite
easy, to comprehend it is much harder, and to blend judgement
and comprehension in a definitive description is the hardest
thing of all.

4. Culture and its laborious emergence from the immediacy
of substantial life must always begin by getting acquainted with
general principles and points of view, so as at first to work up
to a general conception [ Gedanke ] of the real issue, as well as learn¬
ing to support and refute the general conception with reasons;
then to apprehend the rich and concrete abundance [of life]
by differential classification; and finally to give accurate in¬
struction and pass serious judgement upon it. From its very be¬
ginning, culture must leave room for the earnestness of life in
its concrete richness; this leads the way to an experience of the
real issue. And even when the real issue has been penetrated
to its depths by serious speculative effort, this kind of knowing
and judging will still retain its appropriate place in ordinary
conversation.

5. The true shape in which truth exists can only be the scien¬
tific system of such truth. To help bring philosophy closer to
the form of Science, to the goal where it can lay aside the title
‘love of knowing’ and be actual knowing—that is what I have
set myself to do. The inner necessity that knowing should be
Science lies in its nature, and only the systematic exposition
of philosophy itself provides it. But the external necessity, so far
as it is grasped in a general way, setting aside accidental matters
of person and motivation, is the same as the inner, or in other
words it lies in the shape in which time sets forth the sequential
existence of its moments. To show that now is the time for philo-
sophy to be raised to the status of a Science would therefore
be the only true justification of any effort that has this aim,
for to do so would demonstrate the necessity of the aim, would
indeed at the same time be the accomplishing of it.

6. To lay down that the true shape of truth is scientific—
or, what is the same thing, to maintain that truth has only the
Notion as the element of its existence—seems, I know, to con¬
tradict a view which is in our time as prevalent as it is preten¬
tious, and to go against what that view implies. Some explana¬
tion therefore seems called for, even though it must for the
present be no more than a bare assertion, like the view that
it contradicts. If, namely, the True exists only in what, or better
as what, is sometimes called intuition, sometimes immediate
knowledge of the Absolute, religion or being—not at the centre
of divine love but the being of the divine love itself—then what
is required in the exposition of philosophy is, from this view¬
point, rather the opposite of the form of the Notion. For the
Absolute is not supposed to be comprehended, it is to be felt
and intuited; not the Notion of the Absolute, but the feeling
and intuition of it, must govern what is said, and must be
expressed by it.

7. If we apprehend a demand of this kind in its broader con¬
text, and view it as it appears at the stage which self-conscious
Spirit has presently reached, it is clear that Spirit has now got
beyond the substantial life it formerly led in the element of
thought, that it is beyond the immediacy of faith, beyond the
satisfaction and security of the certainty that consciousness then
had, of its reconciliation with the essential being, and of that
being’s universal presence both within and without. It has not
only gone beyond all this into the other extreme of an insubstan¬
tial reflection of itself into itself, but beyond that too. Spirit has
not only lost its essential life; it is “"also conscious of this loss,
and of the finitude that is its own content. Turning away from
the empty husks, and confessing that it lies in wickedness, it
reviles itself for so doing, and now demands from philosophy,
not so much knowledge of what it is , as the recovery through
its agency of that lost sense of solid and substantial being. Philo¬
sophy is to meet this need, not by opening up the fast-locked
nature of substance, and raising this to self-consciousness, not
by bringing consciousness out of its chaos back to an order based


on thought, nor to the simplicity of the Notion, but rather by
running together what thought has put asunder, by suppressing
the differentiations of the Notion and restoring the feeling of
essential being: in short, by providing edification rather than
insight. The ‘beautiful 5 , the ‘holy 5 , the ‘eternal 5 , ‘religion 5 , and
‘love 5 are the bait required to arouse the desire to bite; not the
Notion, but ecstasy, not the cold march of necessity in the
thing itself, but the ferment of enthusiasm, these are supposed
to be what sustains and continually extends the wealth of sub¬
stance.

8. In keeping with this demand is the strenuous, almost
over-zealous and frenzied effort to tear men away from their
preoccupation with the sensuous, from their ordinary, private
[einzelne] affairs, and to direct their gaze to the stars; as if they
had forgotten all about the divine, and were ready like worms
to content themselves with dirt and water. Formerly they had
a heaven adorned with a vast wealth of thoughts and imagery.
The meaning of all that is, hung on the thread of light by which
it was linked to that heaven. Instead of dwelling in this world’s
presence, men looked beyond it, following this thread to an
other-worldly presence, so to speak. The eye of the Spirit had
to be forcibly turned and held fast to the things of this world;
and it has taken a long time before the lucidity which only
heavenly things used to have could penetrate the dullness and
confusion in which the sense of worldly things was enveloped,
and so make attention to the here and now as such, attention
to what has been called ‘experience 5 , an interesting and valid
enterprise. Now we seem to need just the opposite: sense is so
fast rooted in earthly things that it requires just as much force
to raise it. The Spirit shows itself as so impoverished that, like
a wanderer in the desert craving for a mere mouthful of water,
it seems to crave for its refreshment only the bare feeling of the
divine in general. By the little which now satisfies Spirit, we
can measure the extent of its loss.

9. This modest complacency in receiving, or this sparingness
in giving, does not, however, befit Science. Whoever seeks mere
edification, and whoever wants to shroud in a mist the manifold
variety of his earthly existence and of thought, in order to
pursue the indeterminate enjoyment of this indeterminate
divinity, may look where he likes to find all this. He will find


6 phenomenology of spirit

ample opportunity to dream up something for himself. But
philosophy must beware of the wish to be edifying.

io. Still less must this complacency which abjures Science
claim that such rapturous haziness is superior to Science. This
prophetic talk supposes that it is staying right in the centre and
in the depths, looks disdainfully at determinateness ( Horos ),
and deliberately holds aloof from Notion and Necessity as pro¬
ducts of that reflection which is at home only in the finite. But
just as there is an empty breadth, so too there is an empty depth;
and just as there is an extension of substance that pours forth
as a finite multiplicity without the force to hold the multiplicity
together, so there is an intensity without content, one that holds
itself in as a sheer force without spread, and this is in no way
distinguishable from superficiality. The power of Spirit is only
as great as its expression, its depth only as deep as it dares to
spread out and lose itself in its exposition. Moreover, when this
non-conceptual, substantial knowledge professes to have sunk
the idiosyncrasy of the self in essential being, and to philoso¬
phize in a true and holy manner, it hides the truth from itself:
by spurning measure and definition, instead of being devoted
to God, it merely gives free rein both to the contingency of the
content within it, and to its own caprice. Such minds, when
they give themselves up to the uncontrolled ferment of [the
divine] substance, imagine that, by drawing a veil over self-
consciousness and surrendering understanding they become the
beloved of God to whom He gives wisdom in sleep; and hence
what they in fact receive, and bring to birth in their sleep, is
nothing but dreams.

11. Besides, it is not difficult to see that ours is a birth-time
and a period of transition to a new era. Spirit has broken with
the world it has hitherto inhabited and imagined, and is of a
mind to submerge it in the past, and in the labour of its own
transformation. Spirit is indeed never at rest but always
engaged in moving forward. But just as the first breath drawn
by a child after its long, quiet nourishment breaks the gradual¬
ness of merely quantitative growth—there is a qualitative leap,
and the child is born—so likewise the Spirit in its formation
matures slowly and quietly into its new shape, dissolving bit
by bit the structure of its previous world, whose tottering state
is only hinted at by isolated symptoms. The frivolity and bore-









7


dom which unsettle the established order, the vague foreboding
of something unknown, these are the heralds of approaching
change. The gradual crumbling that left unaltered the face of
the whole is cut short by a sunburst which, in one flash, illumi¬
nates the features of the new world.

12. But this new world is no more a complete actuality than
is a new-born child; it is essential to bear this in mind. It comes
on the scene for the first time in its immediacy or its Notion.
Just as little as a building is finished when its foundation has
been laid, so little is the achieved Notion of the whole the whole
itself. When we wish to see an oak with its massive trunk and
spreading branches and foliage, we are not content to be shown
an acorn instead. So too, Science, the crown of a world of Spirit,
is not complete in its beginnings. The onset of the new spirit
is the product of a widespread upheaval in various forms of
culture, the prize at the end of a complicated, tortuous path
and of just as variegated and strenuous an effort. It is the whole
which, having traversed its content in time and space, has
returned into itself, and is the resultant simple Notion of the
whole. But the actuality of this simple whole consists in those
various shapes and forms which have become its moments, and
which will now develop and take shape afresh, this time in their
new element, in their newly acquired meaning.

13. While the initial appearance of the new world is, to begin
with, only the whole veiled in its simplicity , or the general
foundation of the whole, the wealth of previous existence is still
present to consciousness in memory. Consciousness misses in the
newly emerging shape its former range and specificity of con¬
tent, and even more the articulation of form whereby dis¬
tinctions are securely defined, and stand arrayed in their fixed
relations. Without such articulation, Science lacks universal in¬
telligibility, and gives the appearance of being the esoteric pos¬
session of a few individuals: an esoteric possession, since it is
as yet present only in its Notion or in its inwardness; of a few
individuals, since its undiffused manifestation makes its exist¬
ence something singular. Only what is completely determined
is at once exoteric, comprehensible, and capable of being
learned and appropriated by all. The intelligible form of
Science is the way open and equally accessible to everyone, and
consciousness as it approaches Science justly demands that it





8

be able to attain to rational knowledge by way of the ordinary
understanding; for the understanding is thought, the pure ‘I’
as such; and what is intelligible is what is already familiar and
common to Science and the unscientific consciousness alike, the
latter through its having afforded direct access to the former.

14. Science in its early stages, when it has attained neither
to completeness of detail nor perfection of form, is vulnerable
to criticism. But it would be as unjust for such criticism to strike
at the very heart of Science, as it is untenable to refuse to honour
the demand for its further development. This polarization
seems to be the Gordian knot with which scientific culture is
at present struggling, and which it still does not properly under¬
stand. One side boasts of its wealth of material and intelligi¬
bility, the other side at least scorns this intelligibility, and
flaunts its immediate rationality and divinity. Even if the
former side is reduced to silence, whether by the force of truth
alone or by the blustering of the other, and even if, in respect
of fundamentals, it feels itself outmatched, it is by no means
satisfied regarding the said demands; for they are justified, but
not fulfilled. Its silence stems only half from the triumph of its
opponent, and half from the boredom and indifference which
tend to result from the continual awakening of expectations
through unfulfilled promises.

15. As for content, the other side make it easy enough for
themselves at times to display a great expanse of it. They appro¬
priate a lot of already familiar and well-ordered material; by
focusing on rare and exotic instances they give the impression
that they have hold of everything else which scientific know¬
ledge had already embraced in its scope, and that they are also
in command of such material as is as yet unordered. It thus
appears that everything has been subjected to the absolute
Idea, which therefore seems to be cognized in everything and
to have matured into an expanded science. But a closer inspec¬
tion shows that this expansion has not come about through one
and the same principle having spontaneously assumed different
shapes, but rather through the shapeless repetition of one and
the same formula, only externally applied to diverse materials,
thereby obtaining merely a boring show of diversity. The Idea,
which is of course true enough on its own account, remains in
effect always in its primitive condition, if its development in-








9

volves nothing more than this sort of repetition of the same for-
mula. When the knowing subject goes around applying this
single inert form to whatever it encounters, and dipping the
material into this placid element from outside, this is no more
the fulfilment of what is needed, i.e. a self-originating, self-
differentiating wealth ofshapes, than any arbitrary insights into
the content. Rather it is a monochromatic formalism which
only arrives at the differentiation of its material since this has
been already provided and is by now familiar.

16. Yet this formalism maintains that such monotony and
abstract universality are the Absolute, and we are assured that
dissatisfaction with it indicates the inability to master the abso¬
lute standpoint and to keep hold of it. Time was when the bare
possibility of imagining something differently was sufficient to
refute an idea, and this bare possibility, this general thought,
also had the entire positive value of an actual cognition. Nowa¬
days we see all value ascribed to the universal Idea in this non¬
actual form, and the undoing of all distinct, determinate entities
(or rather the hurling of them all into the abyss of vacuity with¬
out further development or any justification) is allowed to pass
muster as the speculative mode of treatment. Dealing with
something from the perspective of the Absolute consists merely
in declaring that, although one has been speaking of it just now
as something definite, yet in the Absolute, the A = A, there is
nothing of the kind, for there all is one. To pit this single insight,
that in the Absolute everything is the same, against the full body
of articulated cognition, which at least seeks and demands such
fulfilment, to palm off its Absolute as the night in which, as
the saying goes, all cows are black—this is cognition naively
reduced to vacuity. The formalism which recent philosophy
denounces and despises, only to see it reappear in its midst, will
not vanish from Science, however much its inadequacy may
be recognized and felt, till the cognizing of absolute actuality
has become entirely clear as to its own nature. Since the pre¬
sentation of a general idea in outline, before any attempt to
follow it out in detail, makes the latter attempt easier to grasp,
it may be useful at this point to give a rough idea of it, at the
same time taking the opportunity to get rid of certain habits
of thought which impede philosophical cognition.

17. In my view, which can be justified only by the exposition






I0

of the system itself, everything turns on grasping and expressing
the True, not only as Substance , but equally as Subject. At the
same time, it is to be observed that substantiality embraces the
universal, or the immediacy of knowledge itself, as well as that
which is being or immediacy for knowledge. If the conception
of God as the one Substance shocked the age in which it was
proclaimed, the reason for this was on the one hand an in¬
stinctive awareness that, in this definition, self-consciousness
was only submerged and not preserved. On the other hand,
the opposite view, which clings to thought as thought, to uni¬
versality as such, is the very same simplicity, is undifferentiated,
unmoved substantiality. And if, thirdly, thought does unite
itself with the being of Substance, and apprehends immediacy
or intuition as thinking, the question is still whether this in¬
tellectual intuition does not again fall back into inert simplicity,
and does not depict actuality itself in a non-actual manner.

18. Further, the living Substance is being which is in truth
Subject , or, what is the same, is in truth actual only in so far
as it is the movement of positing itself, or is the mediation of
its self-othering with itself. This Substance is, as Subject, pure,
simple negativity , and is for this very reason the bifurcation of
the simple; it is the doubling which sets up opposition, and then
again the negation of this indifferent diversity and of its anti¬
thesis [the immediate simplicity]. Only this self -restoring same¬
ness, or this reflection in otherness within itself—not an original
or immediate unity as such—is the True. It is the process ol its
own becoming, the circle that presupposes its end as its goal,
having its end also as its beginning; and only by being worked
out to its end, is it actual.

19. Thus the life of God and divine cognition may well be
spoken of as a disporting of Love with itself; but this idea sinks
into mere edification, and even insipidity, if it lacks the serious¬
ness, the suffering, the patience, and the labour of the negative.
In itself that life is indeed one of untroubled equality and unity
with itself, for which otherness and alienation, and the over¬
coming of alienation, are not serious matters. But this in-itself
is abstract universality, in which the nature of the divine life
to be for itself and so too the self-movement of the form, are
altogether left out of account. If the form is declared to be the
same as the essence, then it is ipso facto a mistake to suppose







11

that cognition can be satisfied with the in-itself or the essence,
but can get along without the form—that the absolute principle
or absolute intuition makes the working-out of the former, or
the development of the latter, superfluous. Just because the
form is as essential to the essence as the essence is to itself, the
divine essence is not to be conceived and expressed merely as
essence, i.e. as immediate substance or pure self-contemplation
of the divine, but likewise as form , and in the whole wealth of
the developed form. Only then is it conceived and expressed
as an actuality.

20. The True is the whole. But the whole is nothing other
than the essence consummating itself through its development.
Of the Absolute it must be said that it is essentially a result , that
only in the end is it what it truly is; and that precisely in this
consists its nature, viz. to be actual, subject, the spontaneous
becoming of itself. Though it may seem contradictory that the
Absolute should be conceived essentially as a result, it needs
little pondering to set this show of contradiction in its true light.
The beginning, the principle, or the Absolute, as at first imme¬
diately enunciated, is only the universal. Just as when I say ‘all
animals’, this expression cannot pass for a zoology, so it is
equally plain that the words, ‘the Divine’, ‘the Absolute’, ‘the
Eternal’, etc., do not express what is contained in them; and
only such words, in fact, do express the intuition as something
immediate. Whatever is more than such a word, even the transi¬
tion to a mere proposition, contains a becoming-other that has
to be taken back, or is a mediation. But it is just this that is
rejected with horror, as if absolute cognition were being sur¬
rendered when more is made of mediation than in simply saying
that it is nothing absolute, and is completely absent in the
Absolute.

21. But this abhorrence in fact stems from ignorance of the
nature of mediation, and of absolute cognition itself For media¬
tion is nothing beyond self-moving selfsameness, or is reflection
into self, the moment of the ‘I’ which is for itself pure negativity
or, when reduced to its pure abstraction, simple becoming. The
T, or becoming in general, this mediation, on account of its
simple nature, is just immediacy in the process of becoming,
and is the immediate itself. Reason is, therefore, misunderstood
when reflection is excluded from the True, and is not grasped






12 PHENOMENOLOGY of spirit

as a positive moment of the Absolute. It is reflection that makes
the True a result, but it is equally reflection that overcomes
the antithesis between the process of its becoming and the result,
or this becoming is also simple, and therefore not different from
the form of the True which shows itself as simple in its result;
the process of becoming is rather just this return into simplicity.
Though the embryo is indeed in itself a human being, it is not
so for itself ; this it only is as cultivated Reason, which has made
itself into what it is in itself And that is when it for the first
time is actual. But this result is itself a simple immediacy, for
it is self-conscious freedom at peace with itself, which has not
set the antithesis on one side and left it lying there, but has been
reconciled with it.

22. What has just been said can also be expressed by saying
that Reason is purposive activity. The exaltation of a supposed
Nature over a misconceived thinking, and especially the rejec¬
tion of external teleology, has brought the form of purpose in
general into discredit. Still, in the sense in which Aristotle, too,
defines Nature as purposive activity, purpose is what is imme¬
diate and at rest , the unmoved which is also self-moving , and as
such is Subject. Its power to move, taken abstractly, is being -
for-self or pure negativity. The result is the same as the begin-
ning, only because the beginning is the purpose ; in other words,
the actual is the same as its Notion only because the immediate,
as purpose, contains the self or pure actuality within itself. The
realized purpose, or the existent actuality, is movement and un¬
folded becoming; but it is just this unrest that is the self; and
the self is like that immediacy and simplicity of the beginning
because it is the result, that which has returned into itself, the
latter being similarly just the self. And the self is the sameness
and simplicity that relates itself to itself.

23. The need to represent the Absolute as Subject has found
expression in the propositions: God is the eternal, the moral
world-order, love, and so on. In such propositions the True is
only posited immediately as Subject, but is not presented as the
movement of reflecting itself into itself. In a preposition of this
kind one begins with the word ‘God’. This by itself is a meaning¬
less sound, a mere name; it is only the predicate that says what
God is , gives Him content and meaning. Only in the end of the
proposition does the empty beginning become actual know-






*3


ledge. This being so, it is not clear why one does not speak
merely of the eternal, of the moral world-order, and so on, or,
as the ancients did, of pure notions like ‘being’, ‘the One’, and
so on, in short, of that which gives the meaning without adding
the meaningless sound as well. But it is just this word that indi¬
cates that what is posited is not a being [i.e. something that
merely is] , or essence, or a universal in general, but rather some¬
thing that is reflected into itself, a Subject. But at the same time
this is only anticipated. The Subject is assumed as a fixed point
to which, as their support, the predicates are affixed by a move¬
ment belonging to the knower of this Subject, and which is not
regarded as belonging to the fixed point itself; yet it is only
through this movement that the content could be represented
as Subject. The way in which this movement has been brought
about is such that it cannot belong to the fixed point; yet, after
this point has been presupposed, the nature of the movement
cannot really be other than what it is, it can only be external.
Hence, the mere anticipation that the Absolute is Subject is
not only not the actuality of this Notion, but it even makes the
actuality impossible; for the anticipation posits the subject as
an inert point, whereas the actuality is self-movement.

24. Among the various consequences that follow from what
has just been said, this one in particular can be stressed, that
knowledge is only actual, and can only be expounded, as
Science or as system ; and furthermore, that a so-called basic pro¬
position or principle of philosophy, if true, is also false, just
because it is only a principle. It is, therefore, easy to refute it.
The refutation consists in pointing out its defect; and it is defec¬
tive because it is only the universal or principle, is only the be¬
ginning. If the refutation is thorough, it is derived and de¬
veloped from the principle itself, not accomplished by counter¬
assertions and random thoughts from outside. The refutation
would, therefore, properly consist in the further development
of the principle, and in thus remedying the defectiveness, if it
did not mistakenly pay attention solely to its negative action,
without awareness of its progress and result on their positive side
too—The genuinely positive exposition of the beginning is thus
also, conversely, just as much a negative attitude towards it,
viz. towards its initially one-sided form of being immediate or
purpose. It can therefore be taken equally well as a refutation


i 4

of the principle that constitutes the basis of the system, but it
is more correct to regard it as a demonstration that the basis
or principle of the system is, in fact, only its beginning.

25. That the True is actual only as system, or that Substance
is essentially Subject, is expressed in the representation of the
Absolute as Spirit —the most sublime Notion and the one which
belongs to the modern age and its religion. The spiritual alone
is the actual] it is essence, or that which has being in itself ; it is
that which relates itself to itself and is determinate , it is other-being
and being-for-self and in this determinateness, or in its self-exter¬
nality, abides within itself; in other words, it is in and for itself .—
But this being-in-and-for-itself is at first only for us, or in itself ,
it is spiritual Substance. It must also be this^br itself\ it must be
the knowledge of the spiritual, and the knowledge of itself as
Spirit, i.e. it must be an object to itself, but just as immediately
a sublated object, reflected into itself. It is for itself only for us,
in so far as its spiritual content is generated by itself. But in
so far as it is also for itself for its own self, this self-generation,
the pure Notion, is for it the objective element in which it has
its existence, and it is in this way, in its existence for itself, an
object reflected into itself. The Spirit that, so developed, knows
itself as Spirit, is Science ; Science is its actuality and the realm
which it builds for itself in its own element.

26. Pure self-recognition in absolute otherness, this Aether as
such , is the ground and soil of Science or knowledge in general.
The beginning of philosophy presupposes or requires that con¬
sciousness should dwell in this element. But this element itself
achieves its own perfection and transparency only through the
movement of its becoming. It is pure spirituality as the universal
that has the form of simple immediacy. This simple being in
its existential form is the soil [of Science], it is thinking which
has its being in Spirit alone. Because this element, this imme¬
diacy of Spirit, is the very substance of Spirit, it is the trans¬
figured essence, reflection which is itself simple, and which is for
itself immediacy as such, being that is reflected into itself.
Science on its part requires that self-consciousness should have
raised itself into this Aether in order to be able to live—and
[actually] to live—with Science and in Science. Conversely, the
individual has the right to demand that Science should at least
provide him with the ladder to this standpoint, should show


him this standpoint within himself. His right is based on his
absolute independence, which he is conscious of possessing in
every phase of his knowledge; for in each one, whether recog¬
nized by Science or not, and whatever the content may be, the
individual is the absolute form, i.e. he is the immediate certainty
of himself and, if this expression be preferred, he is therefore
unconditioned being. The standpoint of consciousness which
knows objects in their antithesis to itself, and itself in antithesis
to them, is for Science the antithesis of its own standpoint. The
situation in which consciousness knows itself to be at home is
for Science one marked by the absence of Spirit. Conversely,
the element of Science is for consciousness a remote .beyond in
which it no longer possesses itself Each of these two aspects [of
self-conscious Spirit] appears to the other as the inversion of
truth. When natural consciousness entrusts itself straightway
to Science, it makes an attempt, induced by it knows not what,
to walk on its head too, just this once; the compulsion to assume
this unwonted posture and to go about in it is a violence it is
expected to do to itself, all unprepared and seemingly without
necessity. Let Science be in its own self what it may, relatively
to immediate self-consciousness it presents itself in an inverted
posture; or, because this self-consciousness has the principle of
its actual existence in the certainty of itself, Science appears
to it not to be actual, since self-consciousness exists on its
own account outside of Science. Science must therefore unite
this element of self-certainty with itself, or rather show that and
how this element belongs to it. So long as Science lacks this actual
dimension, it is only the content as the in-itselj\ the purpose that
is as yet still something inward, not yet Spirit, but only spiritual
Substance. This in-itselj has to express itself outwardly and
become for itself, and this means simply that it has to posit self-
consciousness as one with itself

27. It is this coming-to-be of Science as such or of knowledge,
that is described in this Phenomenology of Spirit. Knowledge in
its first phase, or immediate Spirit, is the non-spiritual, i.e. sense-
consciousness. In order to become genuine knowledge, to beget
the element ofScience which is the pure Notion of Science itself,
it must travel a long way and work its passage. This process
of coming-to-be (considering the content and patterns it will
display therein) will not be what is commonly understood by

an initiation of the unscientific consciousness into Science; it
will also be quite different from the ‘foundation’ of Science;
least of all will it be like the rapturous enthusiasm which, like
a shot from a pistol, begins straight away with absolute know¬
ledge, and makes short work of other standpoints by declaring
that it takes no notice of them.

28. The task of leading the individual from his uneducated
standpoint to knowledge had to be seen in its universal sense,
just as it was the universal individual, self-conscious Spirit,
whose formative education had to be studied. As regards the
relation between them, every moment, as it gains concrete form
and a shape of its own, displays itself in the universal individual.
The single individual is incomplete Spirit, a concrete shape in
whose whole existence one determinateness predominates, the
others being present only in blurred outline. In a Spirit that
is more advanced than another, the lower concrete existence
has been reduced to an inconspicuous moment; what used to
be the important thing is now but a trace; its pattern is
shrouded to become a mere shadowy outline. The individual
whose substance is the more advanced Spirit runs through this
past just as one who takes up a higher science goes through the
preparatory studies he has long since absorbed, in order to bring
their content to mind: he recalls them to the inward eye, but
has no lasting interest in them. The single individual must also
pass through the formative stages of universal Spirit so far as
their content is concerned, but as shapes which Spirit has
already left behind, as stages on a way that has been made level
with toil. Thus, as far as factual information is concerned, we
find that what in former ages engaged the attention of men of
mature mind, has been reduced to the level of facts, exercises,
and even games for children; and, in the child’s progress
through school, we shall recognize the history of the cultural
development of the world traced, as it were, in a silhouette.
This past existence is the already acquired property of universal
Spirit which constitutes the Substance of the individual, and
hence appears externally to him as his inorganic nature. In this
respect formative education, regarded from the side of the in¬
dividual, consists in his acquiring what thus lies at hand,
devouring his inorganic nature, and taking possession of it for
himself. But, regarded from the side of universal Spirit as sub-










'7

stance, this is nothing but its own acquisition of self-conscious¬
ness, the bringing-about ofits own becoming and reflection into
itself.

29. Science sets forth this formative process in all its detail
and necessity, exposing the mature configuration of everything
which has already been reduced to a moment and property of
Spirit.-The goal is Spirit’s insight into what knowing is. Im¬
patience demands the impossible, to wit, the attainment of the
end without the means. But the length of this path has to be
endured, because, for one thing, each moment is necessary; and
further, each moment has to be lingered over, because each is
itself a complete individual shape, and one is only viewed in
absolute perspective when its determinateness is regarded as a
concrete whole, or the whole is regarded as uniquely qualified
by that determination. Since the Substance of the individual,
the World-Spirit itself, has had the patience to pass through
these shapes over the long passage of time, and to take upon
itself the enormous labour of world-history, in which it
embodied in each shape as much of its entire content as that
shape was capable of holding, and since it could not have
attained consciousness of itself by any lesser effort, the indivi¬
dual certainly cannot by the nature of the case comprehend
his own substance more easily. Yet, at the same time, he does
have less trouble, since all this has already been implicitly
accomplished; the content is already the actuality reduced to
a possibility, its immediacy overcome, and the embodied shape
reduced to abbreviated, simple determinations of thought. It
is no longer existence in the form of being-in-itself— neither still
in the original form [of an abstract concept], nor submerged
in existence—but is now the recollected in-itself, ready for con¬
version into the form of being-for-self. How this is done must now
be described more precisely.

30. We take up the movement of the whole from the point
where the sublation of existence as such is no longer necessary;
what remains to be done, and what requires a higher level of
cultural reorientation, is to represent and to get acquainted
with these forms. The existence that has been taken back into
the Substance has only been immediately transposed into the ele¬
ment of the self through that first negation. Hence this acquired
property still has the same character of uncomprehended


18





immediacy, of passive indifference, as existence itself; existence
has thus merely passed over into figurative representation. At the
same time it is thus something familiar, something which the
existent Spirit is finished and done with, so that it is no longer
active or really interested in it. Although the activity that has
finished with existence is itself only the movement of the par¬
ticular Spirit, the Spirit that does not comprehend itself,
[genuine] knowing, on the other hand, is directed against the
representation thus formed, against this [mere] familiarity;
knowing is the activity of the universal self , the concern of
thinking.

31. Quite generally, the familiar, just because it is familiar,
is not cognitively understood. The commonest way in which
we deceive either ourselves or others about understanding is
by assuming something as familiar, and accepting it on that
account; with all its pros and cons, such knowing never gets
anywhere, and it knows not why. Subject and object, God,
Nature, Understanding, sensibility, and so on, are uncritically
taken for granted as familiar, established as valid, and made
into fixed points for starting and stopping. While these remain
unmoved, the knowing activity goes back and forth between
them, thus moving only on their surface. Apprehending and
testing likewise consist in seeing whether everybody’s impres¬
sion of the matter coincides with what is- asserted about these
fixed points, whether it seems that way to him or not.

32. The analysis of an idea, as it used to be carried out, was,
in fact, nothing else than ridding it of the form in which it had
become familiar. To break an idea up into its original elements
is to return to its moments, which at least do not have the form
of the given idea, but rather constitute the immediate property
of the self. This analysis, to be sure, only arrives at thoughts which
are themselves familiar, fixed, and inert determinations. But
what is thus separated and non-actual is an essential moment;
for it is only because the concrete does divide itself, and make
itself into something non-actual, that it is self-moving. The
activity of dissolution is the power and work of the Understand¬
ing, the most astonishing and mightiest of powers, or rather the
absolute power. The circle that remains self-enclosed and, like
substance, holds its moments together, is an immediate rela¬
tionship, one therefore which has nothing astonishing about it.



But that an accident as such, detached from what circumscribes
it, what is bound and is actual only in its context with others,
should attain an existence of its own and a separate freedom—
this is the tremendous power of the negative; it is the energy
of thought, of the pure ‘I’. Death, if that is what we want to
call this non-actuality, is of all things the most dreadful, and
to hold fast what is dead requires the greatest strength. Lacking
strength, Beauty hates the Understanding for asking of her what
it cannot do. But the life of Spirit is not the life that shrinks
from death and keeps itself untouched by devastation, but
rather the life that endures it and maintains itself in it. It wins
its truth only when, in utter dismemberment, it finds itself. It
is this power, not as something positive, which closes its eyes
to the negative, as when we say of something that it is nothing
or is false, and then, having done with it, turn away and pass
on to something else; on the contrary, Spirit is this power only
by looking the negative in the face, and tarrying with it. This
tarrying with the negative is the magical power that converts
it into being. This power is identical with what we earlier called
the Subject, which by giving determinateness an existence in
its own element supersedes abstract immediacy, i.e. the imme¬
diacy which barely is, and thus is authentic substance: that
being or immediacy whose mediation is not outside of it but
which is this mediation itself.

33. The fact that the object represented becomes the prop¬
erty of pure self-consciousness, its elevation to universality in
general, is only one aspect of formative education, not its fulfil¬
ment—The manner of study in ancient times differed from that
of the modern age in that the former was the proper and com¬
plete formation of the natural consciousness. Putting itself to
the test at every point of its existence, and philosophizing about
everything it came across, it made itself into a universality that
was active through and through. In modern times, however,
the individual finds the abstract form ready-made; the effort
to grasp and appropriate it is more the direct driving-forth of
what is within and the truncated generation of the universal
than it is the emergence of the latter from the concrete variety
of existence. Hence the task nowadays consists not so much in
purging the individual of an immediate, sensuous mode of
apprehension, and making him into a substance that is an



20





object of thought and that thinks, but rather in just the opposite,
in freeing determinate thoughts from their fixity so as to give
actuality to the universal, and impart to it spiritual life. But
it is far harder to bring fixed thoughts into a fluid state than
to do so with sensuous existence. The reason for this was given
above: fixed thoughts have the T, the power of the negative,
or pure actuality, for the substance and element of their exist¬


ence, whereas sensuous determinations have only powerless,
abstract immediacy, or being as such. Thoughts become fluid
when pure thinking, this inner immediacy , recognizes itself as a
moment, or when the pure certainty of self abstracts from
itself—not by leaving itself out, or setting itself aside, but by
giving up the fixity of its self-positing, by giving up not only
the fixity of the pure concrete, which the T itself is, in contrast
with its differentiated content, but also the fixity of the dif-
ferennated moments which, posited in the element of pure
thinking, share the unconditioned nature of the ‘I’. Through
this movement the pure thoughts become Notions , and are only
now what they are in truth, self-movements, circles, spiritual
essences, which is what their substance is.

34. This movement of pure essences constitutes the nature
of scientific method in general. Regarded as the connectedness
of their content it is the necessary expansion of that content
V K n k° r N? n,C whole ' Thrcmgh this movement the path bv
"ttrvand!T «*?*** * —hed becomes hkewte I

ms be r rt p hii -p^U“sf:;

to pop pl‘ h a fc re a, ' 0nsh,p - or thought that happens
tru?h on rte prosTnd f c0 " SC '° Usness ' ° r tries to base the

Of rigidly defined thoughtsnstead'th'"'” ^ nd conse< 1 ucnc es.
movement of the Notion will ’ 1S pat ** wa y» through the
secular consciousness in its necessa°™ dT Cnt ‘ re sphere ° f
35- Further, an exposition of ,hh r i C n V . elopment -
Part of Science, because the existent e ofs' C ° nS,1,u,cs ,h '
nothing but the immediate or th* K of S P int V™ primary is
return into itself. The element ofim e §! nnin g—>hut not yet its
what distinguishes this part of Scielic^f mste P ce is there fore

statement of this distinction leads fr ° m the others - The

fixed id - ^ usual, of some



36. The immediate existence of Spirit, consciousness, contains
the two moments of knowing and the objectivity negative to
knowing. Since it is in this element [of consciousness] that Spirit
develops itself and explicates its moments, these moments con¬
tain that antithesis, and they all appear as shapes of conscious¬
ness. The Science of this pathway is the Science of the experience
which consciousness goes through; the substance and its move¬
ment are view'ed as the object of consciousness. Consciousness
knows and comprehends only what falls within its experience;
for what is contained in this is nothing but spiritual substance,


and this, too, as object of the self. But Spirit becomes object
because it is just this movement of becoming an other to itself,
i.e. becoming an object to itself , and of suspending this otherness.
And experience is the name we give to just this movement, in
which the immediate, the unexperienced, i.e. the abstract,
whether it be of sensuous [but still unsensed] being, or only
thought of as simple, becomes alienated from itself and then
returns to itself from this alienation, and is only then revealed
for the first time in its actuality and truth, just as it then has


become a property of consciousness also.

37- The disparity which exists in consciousness between the
T’ and the substance which is its object is the distinction
between them, the negative in general. This can be regarded as
the defect of both, though it is their soul, or that which moves
them. That is why some of the ancients conceived the void as
the principle of motion, for they rightly saw the moving prin¬
ciple as the negative , though they did not as yet grasp that the
negative is the self. Now, although this negative appears at first
as a disparity between the ‘I’ and its object, it is just as muc
the disparity of the substance with itself. Thus what seems to
happen outside of it, to be an activity directed against it, is
really its own doing, and Substance shows itself to be essentiall y
Subject. When it has shown this completely, Spirit has made
its existence identical with its essence; it has itself for its object
just as it is, and the abstract element of immediacy, and ot tne
separation of knowing and truth, is overcome. ® e *nS 1^ *
absolutely mediated; it is a substantial content which is ju
as immediately the property of the I , it is se 1 e or

With this, the Phenomenology of Spirit is concluded. What





Spirit prepares for itself in it, is the element of [true] knowing.
In this element the moments of Spirit now spread themselves
out in that form of simplicity which knows its object as its own
self. They no longer fall apart into the antithesis of being and
knowing, but remain in the simple oneness of knowing; they
are the True in the form of the True, and their difference is
only the difference of content. Their movement, which organ¬
izes itself in this element into a whole, is Logic or speculative philo¬
sophy.

38. Now, because the system of the experience of Spirit em¬
braces only the appearance of Spirit, the advance from this system
to the Science of the True in its true shape seems to be merely


negative, and one might wish to be spared the negative as some¬
thing false, and demand to be led to the truth without more
ado. Why bother with the false?—The view already discussed,
namely, that we should begin with Science straight away, is
to be answered at this point by examining the nature of the
negative in general regarded as what is false. This is a topic
regarding which established ideas notably obstruct the
approach to truth. It will give us occasion to speak of mathe¬
matical cognition, which unphilosophical knowledge regards
as the ideal that philosophy must strive to attain, though it has
so far striven in vain.

39. ‘True’ and ‘false 5 belong among those determinate


notions which are held to be inert and wholly separate essences,
one here and one there, each standing fixed and isolated from
the other, with which it has nothing in common. Against this
view it must be maintained that truth is not a minted coin that
can be given and pocketed ready-made. Nor is there such a
thing as the false, any more than there is something evil. The
evil and the false, to be sure, are not as bad as the devil, for
in the devil they are even made into a particular subjective agent ;
as the false and the evil, they are mere universals , though each
has its own essence as against the other.

The false (for here it is only of this that we speak) would be
the other, the negative of the substance, which as the content
of knowledge is the True. But the substance is itself essentially
the negative, partly as a distinction and determination of the
content, and partly as a simple distinguishing, i.e. as self and
knowledge in general. One can, of course, know something







23


falsely. To know something falsely means that there is a dis¬
parity between knowledge and its Substance. But this very dis¬
parity is the process of distinguishing in general, which is an
essential moment [in knowing]. Out of this distinguishing, of
course, comes their identity, and this resultant identity is the
truth. But it is not truth as if the disparity had been thrown
away, like dross from pure metal, not even like the tool which
remains separate from the finished vessel; disparity, rather, as
the negative, the self, is itself still directly present in the True
as such. Yet we cannot therefore say that the false is a moment
of the True, let alone a component part of it. To say that in
every falsehood there is a grain of truth is to treat the two like
oil and water, which cannot be mixed and are only externally
combined. It is precisely on account of the importance of desig¬
nating the moment of complete otherness that the terms ‘true’ and
‘false’ must no longer be used where such otherness has been
annulled. Just as to talk of the unity of subject and object, of
finite and infinite, of being and thought, etc. is inept, since
object and subject, etc. signify what they are outside of their
unity, and since in their unity they are not meant to be what
their expression says they are, just so the false is no longer qua
false, a moment of truth.

40. Dogmatism as a way of thinking, whether in ordinary
knowing or in the study of philosophy, is nothing else but the
opinion that the True consists in a proposition which is a fixed
result, or which is immediately known. To such questions as,
When was Caesar born?, or How many feet were there in a
stadium?, etc. a clear-cut answer ought to be given, just as it
is definitely true that the square on the hypotenuse is equal to
the sum of the squares on the other two sides of a right-angled
triangle. But the nature of a so-called truth of that kind is dif¬
ferent from the nature of philosophical truths.

41. As regards historical truths—to mention these briefly—
it will be readily granted that so far as their purely historical
aspect is considered, they are concerned with a particular exist¬
ence, with the contingent and arbitrary aspects of a given con¬
tent, which have no necessity. But even such plain truths as
those just illustrated are not without the movement of self-con¬
sciousness. To cognize one of them, a good deal of comparison
is called for, books must be consulted, in some way or other




24





inquiry has to be made. Even an immediate intuition is held
to have genuine value only when it is cognized as a fact along
with its reasons, although it is probably only the bare result
that we are supposed to be concerned about.

42. As for mathematical truths, we should be even less inclined
to regard anyone as a geometer who knew Euclid’s theorems
outwardly by rote, without knowing their proofs, without, as we
might say, to point the contrast, knowing them inwardly. Simi¬
larly, if someone became aware, through measuring a number
of right-angled triangles, that their sides do, in fact, have the
well-known relation to one another, we should consider his
[mere] awareness of the fact unsatisfactory. Yet, even in mathe¬
matical cognition, the essentiality of the proof does not have the
significance and nature of being a moment of the result itself;
when the latter is reached, the demonstration is over and has
disappeared. It is, of course, as a result that the theorem is some -
thing seen to be true ; but this added circumstance has no bearing
on its content, but only on its relation to the knowing Subject.
The movement of mathematical proof does not belong to the
object, but rather is an activity external to the matter in hand.
Thus the nature of the right-angled triangle does not divide itself
into parts in just the way set forth in the construction necessary
for the proof of the proposition that expresses its ratio. The way
and the means by which the result is brought forth belong en¬
tirely to the cognitive process. In philosophical cognition, too,
the way in which the [outer] existence qua existence of a thing
comes about, is distinct from the way in which its essence or inner
nature comes to be. But, to begin with, philosophical cognition
includes both [existence and essence], whereas mathematical
cognition sets forth only the genesis of the existence , i.e. the being
of the nature of the thing in cognition as such. What is more,
philosophical cognition also unites these two distinct processes.
The inner coming-to-be or genesis of substance is an unbroken
transition into outer existence, into being-for-another, and con¬
versely, the genesis of existence is how existence is by iiself taken
back into essence. The movement is the twofold process and
the genesis of the whole, in such wise that each side simulta¬
neously posits the other, and each therefore has both perspec¬
tives within itself; together they thus constitute the whole by








25

dissolving themselves, and by making themselves into its
moments.

43. In mathematical cognition, insight is an activity external
to the thing; it follows that the true thing is altered by it. The
means employed, construction and proof, no doubt contain true
propositions, but it must none the less be said that the content
is false. In the above example the triangle is dismembered, and
its parts consigned to other figures, whose origin is allowed by
the construction upon the triangle. Only at the end is the
triangle we are actually dealing with reinstated. During the
procedure it was lost to view, appearing only in fragments
belonging to other figures.—Here, then, we see the negativity
of the content coming in as well; this could just as much have
been called a falsity’ of the content as is the disappearance of
supposedly fixed conceptions in the movement of the Notion.

44. But what is really defective in this kind of cognition con¬
cerns the cognitive process itself, as well as its material. As
regards the former, we do not, in the first place, see any necessity
in the construction. Such necessity does not arise from the notion
of the theorem; it is rather imposed, and the instruction to draw
precisely these lines when infinitely many others could be
drawn must be blindly obeyed without our knowing anything
beyond except that we believe that this will be to the purpose
in carrying out the proof. In retrospect, this expediency also
becomes evident, but it is only an external expediency, because
it becomes evident only after the proof. This proof, in addition,
follows a path that begins somewhere or other without indicat¬
ing as yet what relation such a beginning will have to the result
that will emerge. In its progress it takes up these particular deter¬
minations and relations, and lets others alone, without its being
immediately clear what the controlling necessity is; an external
purpose governs this procedure.

45. The evident character of this defective cognition of which
mathematics is proud, and on which it plumes itself before
philosophy, rests solely on the poverty of its purpose and the
defectiveness of its stuff, and is therefore of a kind that philo¬
sophy must spurn. Its purpose or Notion is magnitude. It is just
this relationship that is unessential, lacking the Notion. Accord¬
ingly, this process of knowing proceeds on the surface, does not
touch the thing itself, its essence or Notion, and therefore fails



26





to comprehend it [i.e. in terms of its Notion].—The material ,
regarding which mathematics provides such a gratifying trea¬
sury of truths, is space and the numerical unit . Space is the exist¬
ence in which the Notion inscribes its differences as in an empty
lifeless element, in which they are just as inert and lifeless. The
actual is not something spatial, as it is regarded in mathematics;
with non-actual things like the objects of mathematics, neither
concrete sense-intuition nor philosophy has the least concern.
In a non-actual element like this there is only a truth of the
same sort, i.e. rigid, dead propositions. We can stop at any one
of them; the next one starts afresh on its own account, without
the first having moved itself on to the next, and without any
necessary connection arising through the nature of the thing
itself.—Further, because of this principle and element—and
herein consists the formalism of mathematical evidence—[this
kind of] knowing moves forward along the line of equality. For
what is lifeless, since it does not move of itself, does not get as
far as the distinctions of essence, as far as essential opposition
or inequality, and therefore does not make the transition of one
opposite into its opposite, does not attain to qualitative,
immanent motion or ^//'-movement. For it is only magnitude,
the unessential distinction, that mathematics deals with. It
abstracts from the fact that it is the Notion which divides space
into its dimensions and determines the connections between
and within them. It does not, for example, consider the relation¬
ship of line to surface; and, when it compares the diameter of
a circle with its circumference, it runs up against their in¬
commensurability, i.e. a relationship of the Notion, something
infinite that eludes mathematical determination.

46. Nor does the immanent, so-called pure mathematics set
time qua time over against space, as the second material for its
consideration. Applied mathematics does indeed deal with
time, as well as with motion and other concrete things; but the
synthetic propositions, i.e. propositions regarding relationships
determined by their Notion, it takes from experience and
applies its formulae only on these presuppositions. The fact that
the so-called proofs of propositions, such as those regarding the
equilibrium of the lever, or the relation of space and time in
the motion offalling, etc., are often given and accepted as proofs
itself only proves how great is the need of proof for cognition,





27

seeing that, where nothing better is to be had, cognition values
even the hollow semblance of it, and obtains from it some
measure of satisfaction. A critique of these proofs would be as
noteworthy as it would be instructive, 1 partly in order to strip
mathematics of these fine feathers, partly in order to point out
its limitations, and thus show the necessity for a different kind
of knowledge.

As for time , which it is to be presumed would constitute, as
the counterpart of space, the material of the other part of pure
mathematics, it is the existent Notion itself. The principle of
magnitude , of difference not determined by the Notion, and the
principle of equality, of abstract lifeless unity, cannot cope with
that sheer unrest of life and its absolute distinction. It is there¬
fore only in a paralysed form, viz. as the numerical unit , that this
negativity becomes the second material of mathematical cogni¬
tion, which, as an external activity, reduces what is self-moving
to mere material, so as to possess in it an indifferent, external,
lifeless content.

47. Philosophy, on the other hand, has to do, not with un¬
essential determinations, but with a determination in so far as
it is essential; its element and content is not the abstract or non¬
actual, but the actual , that which posits itself and is alive within
itself—existence within its own Notion. It is the process which
begets and traverses its own moments, and this whole move¬
ment constitutes what is positive [in it] and its truth. This truth
therefore includes the negative also, what would be called the
false, if it could be regarded as something from which one might
abstract. The evanescent itself must, on the contrary, be
regarded as essential, not as something fixed, cut off from the
True, and left lying who knows where outside it, any more than
the True is to be regarded as something on the other side, posi¬
tive and dead. Appearance is the arising and passing away that
does not itself arise and pass away, but is ‘in itself’ [i.e. subsists
intrinsically], and constitutes the actuality and the movement
of the life of truth. The True is thus the Bacchanalian revel
in which no member is not drunk; yet because each member
collapses as soon as he drops out, the revel is just as much trans¬
parent and simple repose. Judged in the court of this movement,

1 HofTmeister refers to Enc. §267 where Hegel discusses the laws of gravitation in this

sense. ,



28





the single shapes of Spirit do not persist any more than determi¬
nate thoughts do, but they are as much positive and necessary
moments, as they are negative and evanescent. In the whole of
the movement, seen as a state of repose, what distinguishes itself
therein, and gives itself particular existence, is preserved as
something that recollects itself, whose existence is self-knowledge,
and whose self-knowledge is just as immediately existence.

48. It might seem necessary at the outset to say more about
the method of this movement, i.e. of Science. But its Notion is
already to be found in what has been said, and its proper exposi¬
tion belongs to Logic, or rather it is Logic. For the method is
nothing but the structure set forth in its pure essentiality. We
should realize, however, that the system of ideas concerning
philosophical method is yet another set of current beliefs that
belongs to a bygone culture. If this comment sounds boastful
or revolutionary—and I am far from adopting such a tone—
it should be noted that current opinion itself has already come
to view the scientific regime bequeathed by mathematics as
quite old-fashioned —with its explanations, divisions, axioms, sets
of theorems, its proofs, principles, deductions, and conclusions
from them. Even if its unfitness is not clearly understood, little
or no use is any longer made of it; and though not actually
condemned outright, no one likes it very much. And we should
be sufficiently prejudiced in favour of what is excellent, to sup¬
pose that it will be put to use, and will find acceptance. But
it is not difficult to see that the way of asserting a proposition,
adducing reasons for it, and in the same way refuting its oppo¬
site by reasons, is not the form in which truth can appear. Truth
is its own self-movement, whereas the method just described
is the mode of cognition that remains external to its material.
Hence it is peculiar to mathematics, and must be left to that
science, which, as we have noted, has for its principle the rela¬
tionship of magnitude, a relationship alien to the Notion, and
for its material dead space and the equally lifeless numerical
unit. This method, too, in a looser form, i.e. more blended with
the arbitrary and the accidental, may retain its place, as in con¬
versation, or in a piece of historical instruction designed rather
to satisfy curiosity than to produce knowledge, which is about
what a preface amounts to. In ordinary life, consciousness has
for its content items of information, experiences, concrete







29


objects of sense, thoughts, basic principles,—anything will do
as a content, as long as it is ready to hand, or is accepted as
a fixed and stable being or essence. Sometimes consciousness
follows where this leads, sometimes it breaks the chain, and
deals arbitrarily with its content, behaving as if it were deter¬
mining and manipulating it from outside. It refers the content
back to some certainty or other, even if only to the sensation
of the moment; and conviction is satisfied when a familiar rest¬
ing-place is reached.

49. But we have already pointed out that, once the necessity
of the Notion has banished the slipshod style of conversational
discussion, and along with it the pedantry and pomposity of
science, they are not to be replaced by the non-method of pre¬
sentiment and inspiration, or by the arbitrariness of prophetic
utterance, both of which despise not only scientific pomposity,
but scientific procedure of all kinds.

50. Of course, the triadic form must not be regarded as scien¬
tific when it is reduced to a lifeless schema, a mere shadow,
and when scientific organization is degraded into a table of
terms. Kant rediscovered this triadic form by instinct, but in
his work it was still lifeless and uncomprehended; since then
it has, however, been raised to its absolute significance, and
with it the true form in its true content has been presented,
so that the Notion of Science has emerged. This formalism, of
which we have already spoken generally and whose style we
wish here to describe in more detail, imagines that it has com¬
prehended and expressed the nature and life of a form when
it has endowed it with some determination of the schema as
a predicate. The predicate may be subjectivity or objectivity,
or, say, magnetism, electricity, etc., contraction or expansion,
east or west, and the like. Such predicates can be multiplied
to infinity, since in this way each determination or form can
again be used as a form or moment in the case of an other,
and each can gratefully perform the same service for an other.
In this sort of circle of reciprocity one never learns what the
thing itself is, nor what the one or the other is. In such a pro¬
cedure, sometimes determinations of sense are picked up from
everyday intuition, and they are supposed, of course, to mean
something different from what they say; sometimes what is in
itself meaningful, e.g. pure determinations of thought like sub-


30





ject, Object, Substance, Cause, Universal, etc.—these are used
just as thoughtlessly and uncritically as we use them in everyday
life, or as we use ideas like strength and weakness, expansion
and contraction; the metaphysics is in the former case as un¬
scientific as are our sensuous representations in the latter.

51. Instead of the inner life and self-movement of its exist¬
ence, this kind of simple determinateness of intuition—which
means here sense-knowledge—is predicated in accordance with
a superficial analogy, and this external, empty application of
the formula is called a ‘construction’. This formalism is just like
any other. What a dullard a man must be who could not be
taught in a quarter of an hour the theory that there are asthenic,
sthenic, and indirectly asthenic diseases, and as many modes
of treatment; 1 and, since till quite recently such instruction
sufficed, who could not hope to be transformed in this short
space of time from an empirical into a theoretical physician?
The formalism of such a ‘Philosophy of Nature’ teaches, say,
that the Understanding is Electricity, or the Animal is Nitro¬
gen, or that they are the equivalent of the South or North Pole,
etc., or represent it—whether all this is expressed as baldly as
here or even concocted with more terminology—and con¬
fronted with such a power which brings together things that
appear to lie far apart, and with the violence suffered by the
passive things of sense through such association, and which im¬
parts to them the Notion’s semblance but saves itself the trouble
of doing the main thing, viz. expressing the Notion itself or the
meaning of the sensuous representation—confronted with all
this, the untutored mind may be filled with admiration and
astonishment, and may venerate in it the profound work of
genius. It may be delighted, too, with the clarity of such charac¬
terizations, since these replace the abstract Notion with some¬
thing that can be intuitively apprehended, and so made more
pleasing; and it may congratulate itself on feeling a kinship of
soul with such a splendid performance. The knack of this kind
of wisdom is as quickly learned as it is easy to practise; once
familiar, the repetition of it becomes as insufferable as the
repetition ofa conjuring trick already seen through. The instru¬
ment of this monotonous formalism is no more difficult to
handle than a painter’s palette having only two colours, say

‘So-called Brownianism: John Brown, Elementa medicinae, 1780.









3'


red and green, the one for colouring the surface when a histori¬
cal scene is wanted, the other for landscapes. It would be hard
to decide which is greater in all this, the casual ease with which
everything in heaven and on earth and under the earth is coated
with this broth of colour, or the conceit regarding the excellence
of this universal recipe: each supports the other. What results
from this method of labelling all that is in heaven and earth
with the few determinations of the general schema, and pigeon¬
holing everything in this way, is nothing less than a ‘report
clear as noonday’ 1 on the universe as an organism, viz. a synop¬
tic table like a skeleton with scraps of paper stuck all over it,
or like the rows of closed and labelled boxes in a grocer’s stall.
It is as easy to read off as either of these; and just as all the
flesh and blood has been stripped from this skeleton, and the
no longer living ‘essence’ [SacAe] has been packed away in
the boxes, so in the report the living essence of the matter [ We sen
der Sacke ] has been stripped away or boxed up dead. We have
already remarked that this way of thinking at the same time
culminates in a style of painting that is absolutely monochro¬
matic; for it is ashamed of its schematic distinctions, these pro¬
ducts of reflection, and submerges them all in the void of the
Absolute, from which pure identity, formless whiteness, is pro¬
duced. This monochromatic character of the schema and its
lifeless determinations, this absolute identity, and the transition
from one to the other, are all equally products of the lifeless
Understanding and external cognition.

52. The excellent, however, not only cannot escape the fate
of being thus deprived of life and Spirit, of being flayed and
then seeing its skin wrapped around a lifeless knowledge and
its conceit. Rather we recognize even in this fate the power that
the excellent exercises over the hearts, if not over the minds,
of men; also the constructive unfolding into universality and
determinateness of form in which its perfection consists, and
which alone makes it possible for this universality to be used
in a superficial way.

53. Science dare only organize itself by the life of the Notion
itself. The determinateness, which is taken from the schema
and externally attached to an existent thing, is, in Science, the

1 An allusion to Fichte’s Sun-clear Report to the Public about the True Essence of the Newest
Philosophy (1801).



32





self-moving soul of the realized content. The movement of a
being that immediately is, consists partly in becoming an other
than itself, and thus becoming its own immanent content;
partly in taking back into itself this unfolding [of its content]
or this existence of it, i.e. in making itself into a moment, and
simplifying itself into something determinate. In the former
movement, negativity is the differentiating and positing of exist¬
ence \ in this return into self, it is the becoming of the determinate
simplicity. It is in this way that the content shows that its deter¬
minateness is not received from something else, nor externally
attached to it, but that it determines itself, and ranges itself as
a moment having its own place in the whole. The Understand¬
ing, in its pigeon-holing process, keeps the necessity and Notion
of the content to itself—all that constitutes the concreteness,
the actuality, the living movement of the reality which it
arranges. Or rather, it does not keep this to itself, since it does
not recognize it; for, if it had this insight, it would surely give
some sign of it. It does not even recognize the need for it, else
it would drop its schematizing, or at least realize that it can
never hope to learn more in this fashion than one can learn
from a table of contents. A table of contents is all that it offers,
the content itself it does not offer at all.

Even when the specific determinateness—say one like Mag¬
netism, for example,—is in itself concrete or real, the Under¬
standing degrades it into something lifeless, merely predicating
it of another existent thing, rather than cognizing it as the
immanent life of the thing, or cognizing its native and unique
way of generating and expressing itself in that thing. The formal
Understanding leaves it to others to add this principal feature.
Instead of entering into the immanent content of the thing, it
is forever surveying the whole and standing above the particu¬
lar existence of which it is speaking, i.e. it does not see it at
all. Scientific cognition, on the contrary, demands surrender
to the life of the object, or, what amounts to the same thing,
confronting and expressing its inner necessity. Thus, absorbed
in its object, scientific cognition forgets about that general sur¬
vey, which is merely the reflection of the cognitive process away
from the content and back into itself. Yet, immersed in the
material, and advancing with its movement, scientific cognition
does come back to itself, but not before its filling or content






33


is taken back into itself, is simplified into a determinateness,
and has reduced itself to one aspect of its own existence and
passed over into its higher truth. Through this process the
simple, self-surveying whole itself emerges from the wealth in
which its reflection seemed to be lost.

54. In general, because, as we put it above, substance is in
itself or implicitly Subject, all content is its own reflection into
itself. The subsistence or substance of anything that exists is
its self-identity; for a failure of self-identity would be its dissolu¬
tion. Self-identity, however, is pure abstraction ; but this is think¬
ing. When I say ‘quality’, I am saying simple determinateness;
it is by quality that one existence is distinguished from another,
or is an existence; it is for itself, or it subsists through this simple
oneness with itself. But it is thereby essentially a thought. Com¬
prehended in this is the fact that Being is Thought; and this
is the source of that insight which usually eludes the usual super¬
ficial [begrifflos] talk about the identity of Thought and
Being.—Now, since the subsistence of an existent thing is a self-
identity or pure abstraction, it is the abstraction of itself from
itself, or it is itself its lack of self-identity and its dissolution—
its own inwardness and withdrawal into itself—its own becom¬
ing. Because this is the nature of what is, and in so far as what
is has this nature for [our] knowing, this knowing is not an
activity that deals with the content as something alien, is not
a reflection into itself away from the content. Science is not that
idealism which replaced the dogmatism of assertion with a
dogmatism of assurance, or a dogmatism of self-certainty. On
the contrary, since [our] knowing sees the content return into
its own inwardness, its activity is totally absorbed in the con¬
tent, for it is the immanent self of the content; yet it has at the
same time returned into itself, for it is pure self-identity in other¬
ness. Thus it is the cunning which, while seeming to abstain
from activity, looks on and watches how determinateness, with
its concrete life, just where it fancies it is pursuing its own self-
preservation and particular interest, is in fact doing the very
opposite, is an activity that results in its own dissolution, and
makes itself a moment of the whole.

55. Above we indicated the significance of the Understanding
in reference to the self-consciousness of substance; we can now
see clearly from what has been said its significance in reference




34





to the determination of substance as being. Existence is
Quality, self-identical determinateness, or determinate sim¬
plicity, determinate thought; this is the Understanding of exist¬
ence [i.e. the nature of existence from the standpoint of the
Understanding]. Hence, it is Nous , as Anaxagoras first recog¬
nized the essence of things to be. Those who came after him
grasped the nature of existence more definitely as Eidos or Idea ,
determinate Universality, Species or Kind. It might seem as
if the term Species or Kind is too commonplace, too inadequate,
for Ideas such as the Beautiful, the Holy, and the Eternal that
are currently in fashion. But as a matter of fact Idea expresses
neither more nor less than Species or Kind. But nowadays an
expression which exactly designates a Notion is often spurned
in favour of one which, if only because it is of foreign extraction,
shrouds the Notion in a fog, and hence sounds more edifying.

Precisely because existence is defined as Species, it is a simple
thought; Nous , simplicity, is substance. On account of its sim¬
plicity or self-identity it appears fixed and enduring. But this
self-identity is no less negativity; therefore its fixed existence
passes over into its dissolution. The determinateness seems at
first to be due entirely to the fact that it is related to an other ,
and its movement seems imposed on it by an alien power; but
having its otherness within itself, and being self-moving, is just
what is involved in the simplicity of thinking itself; for this simple
thinking is the self-moving and self-differentiating thought, it
is its own inwardness, it is the pure Notion. Thus common
understanding, too, is a becoming, and, as this becoming, it
is raz.M/zableness.

56. It is in this nature of what is to be in its being its own
Notion, that logical necessity in general consists. This alone is the
rational element and the rhythm of the organic whole; it is as
much knowledge of the content, as the content is the Notion and .
essence in other words, it alone is speculative philosophy . The
self-moving concrete shape makes itself into a simple deter¬
minateness ; in so doing it raises itself to logical form, and exists
in its essentiality; its concrete existence is just this movement,
and is directly a logical existence. It is for this reason unneces¬
sary to clothe the content in an external [logical] formalism;
the content is in its very nature the transition into such formal-










35


ism, but a formalism which ceases to be external, since the form
is the innate development of the concrete content itself.

57. This nature of scientific method, which consists partly
in not being separate from the content, and partly in spon¬
taneously determining the rhythm of its movement, has, as
already remarked, its proper exposition in speculative philo¬
sophy. Of course, what has been said here does express the
Notion, but cannot count for more than an anticipatory
assurance. Its truth does not lie in this partly narrative exposi¬
tion, and is therefore just as little refuted by asserting the con¬
trary, by calling to mind and recounting conventional ideas,
as if they were established and familiar truths, or by dishing
up something new with the assurance that it comes from the
shrine of inner divine intuition. A reception of this kind is usu¬
ally the first reaction on the part of knowing to something un¬
familiar; it resists it in order to save its own freedom and its
own insight, its own authority, from the alien authority (for
this is the guise in which what is newly encountered first
appears), and to get rid of the appearance that something has
been learned and of the sort ofshame this is supposed to involve.
Similarly, when the unfamiliar is greeted with applause, the
reaction is of the same kind, and consists in what in another
sphere would take the form of ultra-revolutionary speech and
action.

58. What, therefore, is important in the study of Science, is
that one should take on oneself the strenuous effort of the
Notion. 1 This requires attention to the Notion as such, to the
simple determinations, e.g. of Being-in-itself, Being-for-itself,
Self-identity, etc.; for these are pure self-movements such as
could be called souls if their Notion did not designate something
higher than soul. The habit of picture-thinking, when it is inter¬
rupted by the Notion, finds it just as irksome as does formalistic
thinking that argues back and forth in thoughts that have no
actuality. That habit should be called material thinking, a con¬
tingent consciousness that is absorbed only in material stuff,
and therefore finds it hard work to lift the [thinking] self clear
of such matter, and to be with itself alone. At the opposite
extreme, argumentation is freedom from all content, and a
sense of vanity towards it. What is looked for here is the effort

1 i.e. the strenuous effort required to think in terms of the Notion.






36

to give up this freedom, and, instead of being the arbitrarily
moving principle of the content, to sink this freedom in the con¬
tent, letting it move spontaneously of its own nature, by the
selfas its own self, and then to contemplate this movement. This
refusal to intrude into the immanent rhythm of the Notion,
either arbitrarily or with wisdom obtained from elsewhere, con¬
stitutes a restraint which is itself an essential moment of the
Notion.

59. There are two aspects of the procedure of argumentation
to which speculative [ begreifende ] thinking is opposed and
which call for further notice. First, such reasoning adopts a nega¬
tive attitude towards the content it apprehends; it knows how
to refute it and destroy it. That something is not the case, is
a merely negative insight, a dead end which does not lead to
a new content beyond itself. In order to have a content once
again, something new must be taken over from elsewhere.
Argumentation is reflection into the empty T, the vanity of
its own knowing.—This vanity, however, expresses not only the
vanity of this content, but also the futility of this insight itself;
for this insight is the negative that fails to see the positive within
itself. Because this reflection does not get its very negativity as
its content, it is never at the heart of the matter, but always
beyond it. For this reason it imagines that by establishing the
void it is always ahead of any insight rich in content. On the
other hand, in speculative \begreifenden\ thinking, as we have
already shown, the negative belongs to the content itself, and
is the positive , both as the immanent movement and determination
of the content, and as the whole of this process. Looked at as
a result, what emerges from this process is the determinate nega¬
tive which is consequently a positive content as well.

60. But in view of the fact that such thinking has a content,
whether of picture-thoughts or abstract thoughts or a mixture
of both, argumentation has another side which makes compre¬
hension difficult for it. The remarkable nature of this other side
is closely linked with the above-mentioned essence of the Idea,
or rather it expresses the Idea in the way that it appears as the
movement which is thinking apprehension. For whereas, in its
negative behaviour, which we have just discussed, ratiocinative
thinking is itself the self into which the content returns, in its
positive cognition, on the other hand, the self is a Subject to








37

which the content is related as Accident and Predicate. This
Subject constitutes the basis to which the content is attached,
and upon which the movement runs back and forth. Specula¬
tive [begreifendes] thinking behaves in a different way. Since the
Notion is the objects’s own self, which presents itself as the com¬
ing-to-be of the object, it is not a passive Subject inertly supporting
the Accidents; it is, on the contrary, the self-moving Notion
which takes its determinations back into itself. In this move¬
ment the passive Subject itself perishes; it enters into the dif¬
ferences and the content, and constitutes the determinateness,
i.e. the differentiated content and its movement, instead of
remaining inertly over against it. The solid ground which argu¬
mentation has in the passive Subject is therefore shaken, and
only this movement itself becomes the object. The Subject that
fills its content ceases to go beyond it, and cannot have any
further Predicates or accidental properties. Conversely, the dis¬
persion of the content is thereby bound together under the self;
it is not the universal which, free from the Subject, could belong
to several others. Thus the content is, in fact, no longer a Predi¬
cate of the Subject, but is the Substance, the essence and the
Notion of what is under discussion. Picture-thinking, whose
nature it is to run through the Accidents or Predicates and
which, because they are nothing more than Predicates and
Accidents, rightly goes beyond them, is checked in its progress,
since that which has the form of a Predicate in a proposition
is the Substance itself. It suffers, as we might put it, a counter-
thrust. Starting from the Subject as though this were a per¬
manent ground, it finds that, since the Predicate is really the
Substance, the Subject has passed over into the Predicate, and,
by this very fact, has been sublated; and, since in this way what
seems to be the Predicate has become the whole and the inde¬
pendent mass, thinking cannot roam at will, but is impeded
by this weight.

Usually, the Subject is first made the basis, as the objective,
fixed self; thence the necessary movement to the multiplicity
of determinations or Predicates proceeds. Here, that Subject
is replaced by the knowing T itself, which links the Predicates
with the Subject holding them. But, since that first Subject
enters into the determinations themselves and is their soul, the
second Subject, viz. the knowing T, still finds in the Predicate





38

what it thought it had finished with and got away from, and
from which it hoped to return into itself; and, instead of being
able to function as the determining agent in the movement of
predication, arguing back and forth whether to attach this or
that Predicate, it is really still occupied with the self of the con¬
tent, having to remain associated with it, instead of being for
itself.

61. Formally, what has been said can be expressed thus: the
general nature of the judgement or proposition, which involves
the distinction of Subject and Predicate, is destroyed by the spe¬
culative proposition, and the proposition of identity which the
former becomes contains the counter-thrust against that sub¬
ject-predicate relationship.—This conflict between the general
form of a proposition and the unity of the Notion which destroys
it is similar to the conflict that occurs in rhythm between metre
and accent. Rhythm results from the floating centre and the
unification of the two. So, too, in the philosophical proposition
the identification of Subject and Predicate is not meant to de¬
stroy the difference between them, which the form of the pro¬
position expresses; their unity, rather, is meant to emerge as
a harmony. The form of the proposition is the appearance of
the determinate sense, or the accent that distinguishes its fulfil¬
ment; but that the predicate expresses the Substance, and that
the Subject itself falls into the universal, this is the unity in which
the accent dies away.

62. To illustrate what has been said: in the proposition ‘God
is being’, the Predicate is ‘being’; it has the significance of some¬
thing substantial in which the Subject is dissolved. ‘Being’ is
here meant to be not a Predicate, but rather the essence; it
seems, consequently, that God ceases to be what he is from his
position in the proposition, viz. a fixed Subject. Here thinking,
instead of making progress in the transition from Subject to Pre¬
dicate, in reality feels itself checked by the loss of the Subject, and,
missing it, is thrown back on to the thought of the Subject. Or,
since the Predicate itself has been expressed as a Subject, as
the being or essence which exhausts the nature of the Subject,
thinking finds the Subject immediately in the Predicate; and
now, having returned into itself in the Predicate, instead of
being in a position where it has freedom for argument, it is still
absorbed in the content, or at least is faced with the demand






39


that it should be. Similarly, too, when one says: ‘the actual is
the universal ’, the actual as subject disappears in its predicate.
The universal is not meant to have merely the significance of
a predicate, as if the proposition asserted only that the actual
is universal; on the contrary, the universal is meant to express
the essence of the actual.—Thinking therefore loses the firm
objective basis it had in the subject when, in the predicate, it
is thrown back on to the subject, and when, in the predicate,
it does not return into itself, but into the subject of the content.

63. This abnormal inhibition of thought is in large measure
the source of the complaints regarding the unintelligibility of
philosophical writings from individuals who otherwise possess
the educational requirements for understanding them. Here we
see the reason behind one particular complaint so often made
against them: that so much has to be read over and over before
it can be understood—a complaint whose burden is presumed
to be quite outrageous, and, ^justified, to admit of no defence.
It is clear from the above what this amounts to. The philosophi¬
cal proposition, since it is a proposition, leads one to believe
that the usual subject—predicate relation obtains, as well as the
usual attitude towards knowing. But the philosophical content
destroys this attitude and this opinion. We learn by experience
that we meant something other than we meant to mean; and
this correction of our meaning compels our knowing to go back
to the proposition, and understand it in some other way.

64. One difficulty which should be avoided comes from mix¬
ing up the speculative with the ratiocinative methods, so that
what is said of the Subject at one time signifies its Notion, at
another time merely its Predicate or accidental property. The
one method interferes with the other, and only a philosophical
exposition that rigidly excludes the usual way of relating the
parts of a proposition could achieve the goal of plasticity.

65. As a matter of fact, non-speculative thinking also has its
valid rights which are disregarded in the speculative way ofstat-
ing a proposition. The sublation of the form of the proposition
must not happen only in an immediate manner, through the mere
content of the proposition. On the contrary, this opposite move¬
ment must find explicit expression; it must not just be the in¬
ward inhibition mentioned abovq. This return of the Notion
into itself must be set forth. This movement which constitutes





40

what formerly the proof was supposed to accomplish, is the dia¬
lectical movement of the proposition itself. This alone is the spe¬
culative in act , and only the expression of this movement is a
speculative exposition. As a proposition, the speculative is only
the internal inhibition and the non -existential return of the
essence into itself. Hence we often find philosophical expositions
referring us to this inner intuition; and in this way they evade
the systematic exposition of the dialectical movement of the
proposition which we have demanded. The proposition should
express what the True is; but essentially the True is Subject.
As such it is merely the dialectical movement, this course that
generates itself, going forth from, and returning to, itself. In
non-speculative cognition proof constitutes this side of
expressed inwardness. But once the dialectic has been separated
from proof, the notion of philosophical demonstration has been
lost.

66. Here we should bear in mind that the dialectical move¬
ment likewise has propositions for its parts or elements; the diffi¬
culty just indicated seems, therefore, to recur perpetually, and
to be inherent in the very nature of philosophical exposition.
This is like what happens in ordinary proof, where the reasons
given are themselves in need of further reasons, and so on ad
infinitum . This pattern of giving reasons and stating conditions
belongs to that method of proof which differs from the dialecti¬
cal movement, and belongs therefore to external cognition. As
regards the dialectical movement itself, its element is the one
Notion; it thus has a content which is, in its own self, Subject
through and through. Thus no content occurs which functions
as an underlying subject, nor receives its meaning as a predi¬
cate; the proposition as it stands is merely an empty form.

Apart from the self that is sensuously intuited or represented,
it is above all the name as name that designates the pure Sub¬
ject, the empty unit without thought-content. For this reason
it may be expedient, e.g., to avoid the name ‘God’, since this
word is not immediately also a Notion, but rather the proper
name, the fixed point of rest of the underlying Subject; whereas,
on the other hand, e.g. ‘Being’ or ‘the One’, ‘Singularity’, ‘the
Subject’, etc. themselves at once suggest concepts. Even if spe¬
culative truths are affirmed of this subject, their content lacks
the immanent Notion, because it is present merely in the form








4*


of a passive subject, with the result that such truths readily
assume the form of mere edification. From this side, too, the
habit of expressing the speculative predicate in the form of a
proposition, and not as Notion and essence, creates a difficulty
that can be increased or diminished through the very way in
which philosophy is expounded. In keeping with our insight
into the nature of speculation, the exposition should preserve
the dialectical form, and should admit nothing except in so far
as it is comprehended [in terms of the Notion], and is the
Notion.

67. The study of philosophy is as much hindered by the con¬
ceit that will not argue, as it is by the argumentative approach.
This conceit relies on truths which are taken for granted and
which it sees no need to re-examine; it just lays them down,
and believes it is entitled to assert them, as well as to judge and
pass sentence by appealing to them. In view of this, it is especi¬
ally necessary that philosophizing should again be made a
serious business. In the case of all other sciences, arts, skills, and
crafts, everyone is convinced that a complex and laborious pro¬
gramme of learning and practice is necessary for competence.
Yet when it comes to philosophy, there seems to be a currently
prevailing prejudice to the effect that, although not everyone
who has eyes and fingers, and is given leather and last, is at
once in a position to make shoes, everyone nevertheless imme¬
diately understands how to philosophize, and how to evaluate
philosophy, since he possesses the criterion for doing so in his
natural reason—as if he did not likewise possess the measure
for a shoe in his own foot. It seems that philosophical com¬
petence consists precisely in an absence of information and
study, as though philosophy left off where they began. Philo¬
sophy is frequently taken to be a purely formal kind of know¬
ledge, void of content, and the insight is sadly lacking that,
whatever truth there may be in the content of any discipline
or science, it can only deserve the name if such truth has been
engendered by philosophy. Let the other sciences try to argue
as much as they like without philosophy—without it they can
have in them neither life, Spirit, nor truth.

68. In place of the long process of culture towards genuine
philosophy, a movement as rich as it is profound, through which
Spirit achieves knowledge, we are offered as quite equivalent





4 2

either direct reyelations from heaven, or the sound common
sense that has never laboured over, or informed itself regarding,
other knowledge or genuine philosophy; and we are assured
that these are quite as good substitutes as some claim chicory
is for coffee. It is not a pleasant experience to see ignorance,
and a crudity without form or taste, which cannot focus its
thought on a single abstract proposition, still less on a connected
chain of them, claiming at one moment to be freedom of
thought and toleration, and at the next to be even genius.
Genius, we all know, was once all the rage in poetry, as it now
is in philosophy; but when its productions made sense at all,
such genius begat only trite prose instead of poetry, or, getting
beyond that, only crazy rhetoric. So, nowadays, philosophizing
by the light of nature, which regards itself as too good for the
Notion, and as being an intuitive and poetic thinking in virtue
of this deficiency, brings to market the arbitrary combinations
of an imagination that has only been disorganized by its
thoughts, an imagery that is neither fish nor flesh, neither
poetry nor philosophy.

69. On the other hand, when philosophizing by the light of
nature flows along the more even course of sound common sense,
it offers at its very best only a rhetoric of trivial truths. And, if
reproached.with the insignificance of these truths, it assures us
in reply that their meaning and fulfilment reside in its heart,
and must surely be present in the hearts of others too, since
it reckons to have said the last word once the innocence of the
heart, the purity of conscience, and such like have been
mentioned. These are ultimate truths to which no exception
can be taken, and beyond which nothing more can be
demanded. It is just the point, however, that the best should
not remain in the recesses of what is inner, but should be
brought out of these depths into the light of day. But it would
be better by far to spare oneself the effort of bringing forth ulti¬
mate truths of that kind; for they have long since been available
in catechisms or in popular sayings, etc.—It is not difficult to
grasp such vague and misleading truths, or even to show that
the mind in believing them is also aware of their very opposite.
When it labours to extricate itself from the bewilderment this
sets up, it falls into fresh contradictions, and may very well burst
out with the assertion that the question is settled, that so and


i







43


so is the truth, and that the other views are sophistries. For
‘sophistry’ is a slogan used by ordinary common sense against
educated reason, just as the expression ‘visionary dreaming’
sums up, once and for all, what philosophy means to those who
are ignorant of it.—Since the man of common sense makes his
appeal to feeling, to an oracle within his breast, he is finished
and done with anyone who does not agree; he only has to
explain that he has nothing more to say to anyone who does
not find and feel the same in himself. In other words, he
tramples underfoot the roots of humanity. For it is the nature
of humanity to press onward to agreement with others; human
nature only really exists in an achieved community of minds.
The anti-human, the merely animal, consists in staying within
the sphere of feeling, and being able to communicate only at
that level.

70. Should anyone ask for a royal road to Science, there is
no more easy-going way than to rely on sound common sense;
and for the rest, in order to keep up with the times, and with
advances in philosophy, to read reviews of philosophical works,
perhaps even to read their prefaces and first paragraphs. For
these preliminary pages give the general principles on which
everything turns, and the reviews, as well as providing historical
accounts, also provide the critical appraisal which, being a
judgement, stands high above the work judged. This common
road can be taken in casual dress; but the high sense for the
Eternal, the Holy, the Infinite strides along in the robes of a
high priest, on a road that is from the first no road, but has
immediate being as its centre, the genius of profound original
ideas and lofty flashes of inspiration. But just as profundity of
this kind still does not reveal the source of essential being, so,
too, these sky-rockets of inspiration are not yet the empyrean.
True thoughts and scientific insight are only to be won through
the labour of the Notion. Only the Notion can produce the uni¬
versality of knowledge which is neither common vagueness nor
the inadequacy of ordinary common sense, but a fully de¬
veloped, perfected cognition; not the uncommon universality
of a reason whose talents have been ruined by indolence and
the conceit of genius, but a truth ripened to its properly
matured form so as to be capable of being the property of all
self-conscious Reason.


44





71. Since I hold that Science exists solely in the self-move¬
ment of the Notion, and since my view differs from, and is in
fact wholly opposed to, current ideas regarding the nature and
form of truth, both those referred to above and other peripheral
aspects of them, it seems that any attempt to expound the sys¬
tem of Science from this point of view is unlikely to be favour¬
ably received. In the meantime, I can bear in mind that if at
times the excellence of Plato’s philosophy has been held to lie
in his scientifically valueless myths, there have also been times,
even called times of ecstatic dreaming, 1 when Aristotle’s philo¬
sophy was esteemed for its speculative depth, and Plato’s Par¬
menides (surely the greatest artistic achievement of the ancient
dialectic) was regarded as the true disclosure and positive
expression of the divine life, and times when, despite the
obscurity generated by ecstasy, this misunderstood ecstasy was
in fact supposed to be nothing else than the pure Notion.
Furthermore, what really is excellent in the philosophy of our
time tajces its value to lie in its scientific quality, and even though
others take a different view, it is in fact only in virtue of its
scientific character that it exerts any influence. Hence, I may
hope, too, that this attempt to vindicate Science for the Notion,
and to expound it in this its proper element, will succeed in
winning acceptance through the inner truth of the subject-mat¬
ter. We must hold to the conviction that it is the nature of truth
to prevail when its time has come, and that it appears only when
this time has come, and therefore never appears prematurely,
nor finds a public not ripe to receive it; also we must accept
that the individual needs that this should be so in order to verify
what is as yet a matter for himself alone, and to experience the
conviction, which in the first place belongs only to a particular
individual, as something universally; held. But in this con¬
nection the public must often be distinguished from those who
pose as its representatives and spokesmen. In many respects the
attitude of the public is quite different from, even contrary to,
that of these spokesmen. Whereas the public is inclined good-
naturedly to blame itself when a philosophical work makes no
appeal to it, these others, certain of their own competence, put
all the blame on the author. The effect of such a work on the

1 This was what the English Enlightment called ‘enthusiasm’, but the word has no reli¬
gious overtones now.








45


public is more noiseless than the action of these dead men when
they bury their dead. The general level of insight now is alto¬
gether more educated, its curiosity more awake, and its judge¬
ment more swiftly reached, so that the feet of those who will
carry you out are already at the door. But from this we must
often distinguish the more gradual effect which corrects the
attention extorted by imposing assurances and corrects, too,
contemptuous censure, and gives some writers an audience only
after a time, while others after a time have no audience left.

72. For the rest, at a time when the universality of Spirit
has gathered such strength, and the singular detail, as is fitting,
has become correspondingly less important, when, too, that
universal aspect claims and holds on to the whole range of the
wealth it has developed, the share in the total work of Spirit
which falls to the individual can only be very small. Because
of this, the individual must all the more forget himself, as the
nature of Science implies and requires. Of course, he must make
of himself and achieve what he can; but less must be demanded
of him, just as he in turn can expect less of himself, and may
demand less for himself.


INTRODUCTION


73. It is a natural assumption that in philosophy, before >ve
start to deal with its proper subject-matter, viz. the actual
cognition ofwhat truly is, one must first of all come to an under¬
standing about cognition, which is regarded either as the instru¬
ment to get hold of the Absolute, or as the medium through
which one discovers it. A certain uneasiness seems justified,
partly because there are different types of cognition, and one
of them might be more appropriate than another for the
attainment of this goal, so that we could make a bad choice
of means; and partly because cognition is a faculty of a definite
kind and scope, and thus, without a more precise definition of
its nature and limits, we might grasp clouds of error instead
of the heaven of truth. This feeling of uneasiness is surely bound
to be transformed into the conviction that the whole project
of securing for consciousness through cognition what exists in
itself is absurd, and that there is a boundary between cognition
and the Absolute that completely separates them. For, if cogni¬
tion is the instrument for getting hold of absolute being, it is
obvious that the use of an instrument on a thing certainly does
not let it be what it is for itself, but rather sets out to reshape
and alter it. If, on the other hand, cognition is not an instrument
of our activity but a more or less passive medium through which
the light of truth reaches us, then again we do not receive the
truth as it is in itself, but only as it exists through and in this
medium. Either way we employ a means which immediately
brings about the opposite of its own end; or rather, what is
really absurd is that we should make use of a means at all.

It would seem, to be sure, that this evil could be remedied
through an acquaintance with the way in which the instrument
works; for this would enable us to eliminate from the repre¬
sentation of the Absolute which we have gained through it
whatever is due*to the instrument, and thus get the truth in
its purity. But this ‘improvement’ would in fact only bring us
back to where we were before. If we remove from a reshaped
thing what the instrument has done to it, then the thing—here









INTRODUCTION


47


the Absolute—becomes for us exactly what it was before this
[accordingly] superfluous effort. On the other hand, if the
Absolute is supposed merely to be brought nearer to us through
this instrument, without anything in it being altered, like a bird
caught by a lime-twig, it would surely laugh our little ruse to
scorn, if it were not with us, in and for itself, all along, and
of its own volition. For a ruse is just what cognition would be
in such a case, since it would, with its manifold exertions, be
giving itself the air of doing something quite different from
creating a merely immediate and therefore effortless relation¬
ship. Or, if by testing cognition, which we conceive of as a
medium , we get to know the law of its refraction, it is again useless
to subtract this from the end result. For it is not the refraction
of the ray, but the ray itself whereby truth reaches us, that is
cognition; and if this were removed, all that would be indicated
would be a pure direction or a blank space.

74. Meanwhile, if the fear of falling into error sets up a mis¬
trust of Science, which in the absence of such scruples gets on
with the work itself, and actually cognizes something, it is hard
to see why we should not turn round and mistrust this very
mistrust. Should we not be concerned as to whether this fear
of error is not just the error itself? Indeed, this fear takes some¬
thing—a great deal in fact—for granted as truth, supporting
its scruples and inferences on what is itself in need of prior scru¬
tiny to see if it is true. To be specific, it takes for granted certain
ideas about cognition as an instrument and as a medium , and
assumes that there is a difference between ourselves and this cognition.
Above all, it presupposes that the Absolute stands on one side
and cognition on the other, independent and separated from
it, and yet is something real; or in other words, it presupposes
that cognition which, since it is excluded from the Absolute,
is surely outside of the truth as well, is nevertheless true, an
assumption whereby what calls itself fear of error reveals itself
rather as fear of the truth.

75. This conclusion stems from the fact that the Absolute
alone is true, or the truth alone is absolute. One may set this
aside on the grounds that there is a type of cognition which,
though it does not cognize the Absolute as Science aims to, is
still true, and that cognition in general, though it be incapable
of grasping the Absolute, is still capable of grasping other kinds







of truth. But we gradually come to see that this kind of talk
which goes back and forth only leads to a hazy distinction
between an absolute truth and some other kind of truth, and
that words like ‘absolute’, ‘cognition’, etc. presuppose a mean¬
ing which has yet to be ascertained.

76. Instead of troubling ourselves with such useless ideas and
locutions about cognition as ‘an instrument for getting hold of
the Absolute’, or as ‘a medium through which we view the
truth’ (relationships which surely, in the end, are what all these
ideas of a cognition cut off from the Absolute, and an Absolute
separated from cognition, amount to); instead of putting up
with excuses which create the incapacity of Science by assuming
relationships of this kind in order to be exempt from the hard
work of Science, while at the same time giving the impression
of working seriously and zealously; instead of bothering to
refute all these ideas, we could reject them out of hand as adven¬
titious and arbitrary, and the words associated with them like
‘absolute’, ‘cognition’, ‘objective’ and ‘subjective’, and count¬
less others whose meaning is assumed to be generally familiar,
could even be regarded as so much deception. For to give the
impression that their meaning is generally well known, or that
their Notion is comprehended, looks more like an attempt to
avoid the main problem, which is precisely to provide this
Notion. We could, with better justification, simply spare our¬
selves the trouble of paying any attention whatever to such ideas
and locutions; for they are intended to ward off Science itself,
and constitute merely an empty appearance of knowing, which
vanishes immediately as soon as Science comes on the scene.
But Science, just because it comes on the scene, is itself an
appearance: in coming on the scene it is not yet Science in its
developed and unfolded truth. In this connection it makes no
difference whether we think of Science as the appearance
because it comes on the scene alongside another mode of know¬
ledge, or whether we call that other untrue knowledge its mani¬
festation. In any case Science must liberate itself from this sem¬
blance, and it can do so only by turning against it. For, when
confronted with a knowledge that is without truth, Science can
neither merely reject it as an ordinary way of looking at things,
while assuring us that its Science is a quite different sort of
cognition for which that ordinary knowledge is of no account





INTRODUCTION


49


whatever; nor can it appeal to the vulgar view for the intima¬
tions it gives us of something better to come. By the former
assurance , Science would be declaring its power to lie simply in
its being ; but the untrue knowledge likewise appeals to the fact
that it is, and assures us that for it Science is of no account. One
bare assurance is worth just as much as another. Still less can
Science appeal to whatever intimations of something better it
may detect in the cognition that is without truth, to the signs
which point in the direction of Science. For one thing, it would
only be appealing again to what merely is; and for another,
it would only be appealing to itself, and to itself in the mode
in which it exists in the cognition that is without truth. In other
words, it would be appealing to an inferior form of its being,
to the way it appears, rather than to what it is in and for itself.
It is for this reason that an exposition of how knowledge makes
its appearance will here be undertaken.

77. Now, because it has only phenomenal knowledge for its
object, this exposition seems not to be Science, free and self-
moving in its own peculiar shape; yet from this standpoint it can
be regarded as the path of the natural consciousness which
presses forward to true knowledge; or as the way of the Soul
which journeys through the series of its own configurations as
though they were the stations appointed for it by its own
nature, 1 so that it may purify itself for the life of the Spirit, and
achieve finally, through a completed experience of itself, the
awareness of what it really is in itself.

78. Natural consciousness will show itself to be only the
Notion of knowledge, or in other words, not to be real know¬
ledge. But since it directly takes itself to be real knowledge, this
path has a negative significance for it, and what is in fact the
realization of the Notion, counts for it rather as the loss of its
own self; for it does lose its truth on this path. The road can
therefore be regarded as the pathway of doubt , or more precisely
as the way of despair. For what happens on it is not what is
ordinarily understood when the word ‘doubt 5 is used: shilly¬
shallying about this or that presumed truth, followed by a
return to that truth again, after the doubt has been appro¬
priately dispelled—so that at the end of the process the matter
is taken to be what it was in the first place. On the contrary,

1 An allusion perhaps to the Stations of the Cross.





50

this path is the conscious insight into the untruth of phenomenal
knowledge, for which the supreme reality is what is in truth
only the unrealized Notion. Therefore this thoroughgoing
scepticism is also not the scepticism with which an earnest zeal
for truth and Science fancies it has prepared and equipped itself
in their service: the resolve , in Science, not to give oneself over
to the thoughts of others, upon mere authority, but to examine
every thing for oneself and follow only one’s own conviction, or
better still, to produce everything oneself, and accept only one’s
own deed as what is true.

The series of configurations which consciousness goes
through along this road is, in reality, the detailed history of the
education of consciousness itself to the standpoint of Science.
That zealous resolve represents this education simplistically as
something directly over and done with in the making of the
resolution; but the way of the Soul is the actual fulfilment of
the resolution, in contrast to the untruth of that view. Now,
following one’s own conviction is, of course, more than giving
oneself over to authority; but changing an opinion accepted
on authority into an opinion held out of personal conviction,
does not necessarily alter the content of the opinion, or replace
error with truth. The only difference between being caught up
in a system of opinions and prejudices based on persona] con¬
viction, and being caught up in one based on the authority of
others, lies in the added conceit that is innate in the former posi¬
tion. The scepticism that is directed against the whole range
of phenomenal consciousness, on the other hand, renders the
Spirit for the first time competent to examine what truth is.
For it brings about a state of despair about all the so-called
natural ideas, thoughts, and opinions, regardless of whether
they are called one’s own or someone else s, ideas with which the
consciousness that sets about the examination [of truth] straight
away is still filled and hampered, so that it is, in fact, incapable
of carrying out what it wants to undertake.

79. The necessary progression and interconnection of the
forms of the unreal consciousness will by itself bring to pass the
completion of the series. To make this more intelligible, it may
be remarked, in a preliminary and general way, that the exposi¬
tion of the untrue consciousness in its untruth is not a merely
negative procedure. The natural consciousness itself normally




INTRODUCTION


5i


takes this one-sided view of it; and a knowledge which makes
this one-sidedness its very essence is itself one of the patterns
of incomplete consciousness which occurs on the road itself, and
will manifest itself in due course. This is just the scepticism
which only ever sees pure nothingness in its result and abstracts
from the fact that this nothingness is specifically the nothingness
of that from which it results. For it is only when it is taken as
the result of that from which it emerges, that it is, in fact, the
true result; in that case it is itself a determinate nothingness, one
which has a content. The scepticism that ends up with the bare
abstraction of nothingness or emptiness cannot get any further
from there, but must wait to see whether something new comes
along and what it is, in order to throw it too into the same empty
abyss. But when, on the other hand, the result is conceived as
it is in truth, namely, as a determinate negation, a new form has
thereby immediately arisen, and in the negation the transition
is made through which the progress through the complete series
of forms comes about of itself.

80. But the goal is as necessarily fixed for knowledge as the
serial progression; it is the point where knowledge no longer
needs to go beyond itself, where knowledge finds itself, where
Notion corresponds to object and object to Notion. Hence the
progress towards this goal is also unhalting, and short of it no
satisfaction is to be found at any of the stations on the way.
Whatever is confined within the limits of a natural life cannot
by its own efforts go beyond its immediate existence; but it is
driven beyond it by something else, and this uprooting entails
its death. Consciousness, however, is explicitly the Notion of
itself. Hence it is something that goes beyond limits, and since
these limits are its own, it is something that goes beyond itself.
With the positing of a single particular the beyond is also estab¬
lished for consciousness, even if it is only alongside the limited
object as in the case of spatial intuition. Thus consciousness
suffers this violence at its own hands: it spoils its own limited
satisfaction. When consciousness feels this violence, its anxiety
may well make it retreat from the truth, and strive to hold on
to what it is in danger of losing. But it can find no peace. If
it wishes to remain in a state of unthinking inertia, then thought
troubles its thoughtlessness, and its own unrest disturbs its in¬
ertia. Or, if it entrenches itself in sentimentality, which assures


52

us that it finds everything to be good in its kind , then this
assurance likewise suffers violence at the hands of Reason for
precisely in so far as something is merely a kind, Reason finds
it not to be good. Or, again, its fear of the truth may lead con¬
sciousness to hide, from itself and others, behind the pretension
that its burning zeal for truth makes it difficult or even imposs¬
ible to find any other truth but the unique truth of vanity_

that of being at any rate cleverer than any thoughts that one
gets by oneself or from others. This conceit which understands
how to belittle every truth, in order to turn back into itself and
gloat over its own understanding, which knows how to dissolve
every thought and always find the same barren Ego instead of
any content—this is a satisfaction which we must leave to itself
for it flees from the universal, and seeks only to be for itself

81. In addition to these preliminary general remarks about
the manner and the necessity of the progression, it may be useful
to say something about the method of carrying out the inquiry. If
this exposition is viewed as a way of relating Science to phenomenal
knowledge, and as an investigation and examination of the reality
of cognition , it would seem that it cannot take place without some
presupposition which can serve as its underlying criterion. For
an examination consists in applying an accepted standard and
in determining whether something is right or wrong on the basis
of the resulting agreement or disagreement of the thing exam¬
ined ; thus the standard as such (and Science likewise if it were
the criterion) is accepted as the essence or as the in-itself But
here, where Science has just begun to come on the scene, neither
Science nor anything else has yet justified itself as the essence
or the in-itself; and without something of the sort it seems that
no examination can take place.

82. This contradiction and its removal will become more
definite if we call to mind the abstract determinations of truth
and knowledge as they occur in consciousness. Consciousness
simultaneously distinguishes itself from something, and at the
same time relates itself to it, or, as it is said, this something exists
for consciousness; and the determinate aspect of this relating ,
or of the being of something for a consciousness, is knowing .
But we distinguish this being-for-another from being-in-itself ;
whatever is related to knowledge or knowing is also distin¬
guished from it, and posited as existing outside of this relation-


NTRODUCTION


53


ship; this being-in-itself is called truth. Just what might be in¬
volved in these determinations is of no further concern to us
here. Since our object is phenomenal knowledge, its determina¬
tions too will at first be taken directly as they present them¬
selves; and they do present themselves very much as we have
already apprehended them.

83. Now, if we inquire into the truth of knowledge, it seems
that we are asking what knowledge is in itself. Yet in this inquiry
knowledge is our object, something that exists for us; and the
in-itself that would supposedly result from it would rather be
the being of knowledge for us. What we asserted to be its essence
would be not so much its truth but rather just our knowledge
of it. The essence or criterion would lie within ourselves, and
that which was to be compared with it and about which a de¬
cision would be reached through this comparison would not
necessarily have to recognize the validity of such a standard.

84. But the dissociation, or this semblance of dissociation and
presupposition, is overcome by the nature of the object we are
investigating. Consciousness provides its own criterion from
within itself, so that the investigation becomes a comparison
of consciousness with itself; for the distinction made above falls
within it. In consciousness one thing exists for another, i.e. con¬
sciousness regularly contains the determinateness of the
moment of knowledge; at the same time, this other is to con¬
sciousness not merely for it, but is also outside of this relation¬
ship, or exists in itself : the moment of truth. Thus in what con¬
sciousness affirms from within itself as being-in-itself or the True
we have the standard which consciousness itself sets up by which
to measure what it knows. If we designate knowledge as the
Notion, but the essence or the True as what exists, or the object,
then the examination consists in seeing whether the Notion cor¬
responds to the object. But if we call the essence or in-itself of
the object the Notion , and on the other hand understand by the
object the Notion itself as object, viz. as it exists for an other, then
the examination consists in seeing whether the object corre¬
sponds to its Notion. It is evident, of course, that the two pro¬
cedures are the same. But the essential point to bear in mind
throughout the whole investigation is that these two moments,
‘Notion’ and ‘object’, ‘being-for-another’ and ‘being-in-itself’,
both fall within that knowledge which we are investigating.


54

Consequently, we do not need to import criteria, or to make
use of our own bright ideas and thoughts during the course
of the inquiry; it is precisely when we leave these aside that we
succeed in contemplating the matter in hand as it is in and for
itself.

85. But not only is a contribution by us superfluous, since
Notion and object, the criterion and what is to be tested, are
present in consciousness itself, but we are also spared the trouble
of comparing the two and really testing them, so that, since what
consciousness examines is its own self, all that is left for us to
do is simply to look on. For consciousness is, on the one hand,
consciousness of the object, and on the other, consciousness of
itself; consciousness of what for it is the True, and consciousness
of its knowledge of the truth. Since both ar efor the same con¬
sciousness, this consciousness is itself their comparison, it is for
this same consciousness to know whether its knowledge of the
object corresponds to the object or not. The object, it is true,
seems only to be for consciousness in the way that consciousness
knows it; it seems that consciousness cannot, as it were, get
behind the object as it exists for consciousness so as to examine
what the object is in itself and hence, too, cannot test its own
knowledge by that standard. But the distinction between the
in-itself and knowledge is already present in the very fact that
consciousness knows an object at all.Something is for it the in-
itself and knowledge, or the being of the object for conscious¬
ness,'is, it, another moment. Upon this distinction, which
is present as a fact, the examination rests. If the comparison
shows that these two moments do not correspond to one
another, it would seem that consciousness must alter its know¬
ledge to make it conform to the object. But, in fact, in the altera¬
tion of the knowledge, the object itself alters for it too, for the
knowledge that was present was essentially a knowledge of the
object: as the knowledge changes, so too does the object, for
it essentially belonged to this knowledge. Hence it comes to pass
for consciousness that what it previously took to be the in-itself
is not an in-itself\ or that it was only an in-itselfybr consciousness.
Since consciousness thus finds that its knowledge does not corre¬
spond to its object, the object itself does not stand the test; in
other words, the criterion for testing is altered when that for
which it was to have been the criterion fails to pass the test;






INTRODUCTION


55

and the testing is not only a testing of what we know, but also
a testing of the criterion of what knowing is.

86. Inasmuch as the new true object issues from it , this dialectical
movement which consciousness exercises on itself and which
affects both its knowledge and its object, is precisely what is
called experience [Erfahrung]. In this connection there is a
moment in the process just mentioned which must be brought
out more clearly, for through it a new light will be thrown on
the exposition which follows. Consciousness knows something ;
this object is the essence or the in-itself ; but it is also for con¬
sciousness the in-itself. This is where the ambiguity of this truth
enters. We see that consciousness now has two objects: one is
the first in-itself the second is the being-for-consciousness of this in-
itself. The latter appears at first sight to be merely the reflection
of consciousness into itself, i.e. what consciousness has in mind
is not an object, but only its knowledge of that first object. But,
as was shown previously, the first object, in being known, is
altered for consciousness; it ceases to be the in-itself, and
becomes something that is the in-itself only for consciousness. And
this then is the True: the being-for-consciousness of this in-itself.
Or, in other words, this is the essence , or the object of conscious¬
ness. This new object contains the nothingness of the first, it
is what experience has made of it.

87. This exposition of the course of experience contains a
moment in virtue of which it does not seem to agree with what
is ordinarily understood by experience. This is the moment of
transition from the first object and the knowledge of it, to the
other object, which experience is said to be about. Our account
implied that our knowledge of the first object, or the being-
/br-consciousness of the first in-itself, itself becomes the second
object. It usually seems to be the case, on the contrary, that
our experience of the untruth of our first notion comes by way
of a second object which we come upon by chance and extern¬
ally, so that our part in all this is simply the pure apprehension
of what is in and for itself. From the present viewpoint, however,
the new object shows itself to have come about through a reversal
of consciousness itself This way of looking at the matter is some¬
thing contributed by us, by means of which the succession of
experiences through which consciousness passes is raised into
a scientific progression—but it is not known to the consciousness



56





that we are observing. But, as a matter of fact, we have here
the same situation as the one discussed in regard to the relation
between our exposition and scepticism, viz. that in every case
the result of an untrue mode of knowledge must not be allowed
to run away into an empty nothing, but must necessarily be
grasped as the nothing of thatfrom which it results —a result which
contains what was true in the preceding knowledge. It shows
up here like this: since what first appeared as the object sinks
for consciousness to the level of its way of knowing it, and since
the in-itself becomes a being-for-consciousness of the in-itself, the
latter is now the new object. Herewith a new pattern of con¬
sciousness comes on the scene as well, foF which the essence
is something different from what it was at the preceding stage.
It is this fact that guides the entire series of the patterns of con¬
sciousness in their necessary sequence. But it is just this neces¬
sity itself, or the origination of the new object, that presents
itself to consciousness without its understanding how this
happens, which proceeds for us, as it were, behind the back
of consciousness. Thus in the movement of consciousness there
occurs a moment of being-in-itself or being-for-us which is not
present to the consciousness comprehended in the experience
itself. The content , however, of what presents itself to us does
exist for it; we comprehend only the formal aspect of that con¬
tent, or its pure origination. For it , what has thus arisen exists
only as an object \for us , it appears at the same time as move¬
ment and a process of becoming.

88. Because of this necessity, the way to Science is itself
already Science, and hence, in virtue of its content, is the Science
of the experience of consciousness.

89. The experience of itself which consciousness goes
through can, in accordance with its Notion, comprehend noth¬
ing less than the entire system of consciousness, or the entire
realm of the truth of Spirit. For this reason, the moments of
this truth are exhibited in their own proper determinateness,
viz. as being not abstract moments, but as they are for con¬
sciousness, or as consciousness itself stands forth in its relation
to them. Thus the moments of the whole are patterns of conscious¬
ness. In pressing forward to its true existence, consciousness will
arrive at a point at which it gets rid of its semblance of being
burdened with something alien, with what is only for it, and





INTRODUCTION


57

some sort of ‘other’, at a point where appearance becomes
identical with essence, so that its exposition will coincide at just
this point with the authentic Science of Spirit. And finally,
when consciousness itself grasps this its own essence, it will
signify the nature of absolute knowledge itself.
