A. CONSCIOUSNESS


I.


SENSE-CERTAINTY: OR THE ‘THIS’ AND
‘MEANING’ [MEJNEN]


90. The knowledge or knowing which is at the start or is im¬
mediately our object cannot be anything else but immediate
knowledge itself, a knowledge of the immediate or of what simply
is. Our approach to the object must also be immediate or receptive;
we must alter nothing in the object as it presents itself. In appre¬
hending it, we must refrain from trying to comprehend it.

01 Because of its concrete content, sense-certamty imme¬
diately appears as the richest kind of knowledge, indeed a know-
ledge of infinite wealth for which no bounds can be found, either
when we reach out into space and time in which it is dispersed,
or when we take a bit of this wealth, and by division enter into
it. Moreover, sense-certainty appears to be the truest know¬
ledge; for it has not as yet omitted anything from the object,
but has the object before it in its perfect entirety. But, in the
event, this very certainty proves itself to be the most abstract and
poorest truth. All that it says about what it knows is just that
it is; and its truth contains nothing but the sheer being of the
thing [ Sache ]. Consciousness, for its part, is in this certainty only
as a pure ‘I’; or I am in it only as a pure ‘This’, and the object
similarly only as a pure ‘This’. I, this particular I, am certain
of this particular thing, not because I, qua consciousness, in
knowing it have developed myself or thought about it in various
ways; and also not because the thing of yvhich I am certain, in
virtue of a host of distinct qualities, would be in its own self
a rich complex of connections, or related in various ways to
other things. Neither of these has anything to do with the truth
of sense-certainty: here neither I nor the thing has the signifi¬
cance of a complex process of mediation; the ‘I’ does not have
the significance of a manifold imagining or thinking; nor does
the ‘thing’ signify something that has a host of qualities. On
the contrary, the thing is, and it is, merely because it is. It is;
this is the essential point for sense-knowledge, and this pure






SENSE-CERTAINTY


59


being , or this simple immediacy, constitutes its truth . Similarly,
certainty as a connection is an immediate pure connection: con¬
sciousness is ‘/’, nothing more, a pure ‘This 5 ; the singular con¬
sciousness knows a pure ‘This’, or the single item.

92. But when we look carefully at this pure being which con¬
stitutes the essence of this certainty, and which this certainty
pronounces to be its truth, we see that much more is involved.
An actual sense-certainty is not merely this pure immediacy,
but an instance of it. Among the countless differences cropping
up here we find in every case that the crucial one is that, in
sense-certainty, pure being at once splits up into what we have
called the two ‘Thises’, one ‘This’ as T, and the other ‘This’
as object. When we reflect on this difference, we find that
neither one nor the other is only immediately present in sense-
certainty, but each is at the same time mediated : I have this cer¬
tainty through something else, viz. the thing; and it, similarly,
is in sense-certainty through something else, viz. through the ‘I 5 .

93. It is not just we who make this distinction between
essence and instance, between immediacy and mediation; on
the contrary, we find it within sense-certainty itself, and it is
to be taken up in the form in which it is present there, not as
we have just defined it. One of the terms is posited in sense-
certainty in the form of a simple, immediate being, or as the
essence, the object ; the other, however, is posited as what is un¬
essential and mediated, something which in sense-certainty is
not in itself but through [the mediation of] an other, the T,
a knowing which knows the object only because the object! s, while
the knowing may either be or not be. But the object is: it is
what is true, or it is the essence. It is, regardless of whether it
is known or not; and it remains, even it it is not known, whereas
there is no knowledge if the object is not there.

94. The question must therefore be considered whether in
sense-certainty itself the object is in fact the kind of essence that
sense-certainty proclaims it to be; whether this notion of it as
the essence corresponds to the way it is present in sense-cer¬
tainty. To this end, we have not to reflect on it and ponder
what it might be in truth, but only to consider the way in which
it is present in sense-certainty.

95. It is, then, sense-certainty itself that must be asked:
‘What is the This ?’ If we take the ‘This’ in the twofold shape



6o


A. CONSCIOUSNESS


of its being, as ‘Now’ and as ‘Here’, the dialectic it has in it
will receive a form as intelligible as the ‘This itself is. To the
question: ‘What is Now?’, let us answer, e.g. ‘Now is Night.’
In order to test the truth of this sense-certainty a simple experi¬
ment will suffice. We write down this truth; a truth cannot lose
anything by being written down, any more than it can lose any¬
thing through our preserving it. If now, this noon, we look again
at the written truth we shall have to say that it has become
stale.

96. The Now that is Night is preserved, i.e. it is treated as what
it professes to be, as something that is ; but it proves itself to
be, on the contrary, something that is not. The Now does indeed
preserve itself, but as something that is not Night; equally, it
preserves itself in face of the Day that it now is, as something
that also is not Day, in other words, as a negative in general.
This self-preserving Now is, therefore, not immediate but medi¬
ated; for it is determined as a permanent and self-preserving
Now' through the fact that something else, viz. Day and Night,
is not. As so determined, it is still just as simply Now as before,
and in this simplicity is indifferent to what happens in it; just
as little as Night and Day are its being, just as much also is
it Day and Night; it is not in the least affected by this its other-
being. A simple thing of this kind which is through negation,
which is neither This nor That, a not-This, and is with equal
indifference This as well as That—such a thing we call a uni¬
versal. So it is in fact the universal that is the true [content]
of sense-certainty.

97. It is as a universal too that we utter what the sensuous
[content] is. What we say is: ‘This’, i.e. the universal This; or,
‘it is’, i.e. Being in general. Of course, we do not envisage the uni¬
versal This or Being in general, but w Gutter the universal; in
other words, we do not strictly say what in this sense-certainty
we mean to say. But language, as we see, is the more truthful;
in it, we ourselves directly refute what we mean to say, and since
the universal is the true [content] of sense-certainty and lan¬
guage expresses this true [content] alone, it is just not possible
for us ever to say, or express in words, a sensuous being that
we mean.

98. The same will be the case with the other form of the
‘This’, with ‘Here’. ‘Here’ is, e.g., the tree. If I turn round,





SENSE-CERTAINTY


61


this truth has vanished and is converted into its opposite: ‘No
tree is here, but a house instead’. ‘Here’ itself does not vanish;
on the contrary, it abides constant in the vanishing of the house,
the tree, etc., and is indifferently house or tree. Again, therefore,
the ‘This’ shows itself to be a mediated simplicity , or a universality .

99. Pure being remains, therefore, as the essence of this sense-
certainty, since sense-certainty has demonstrated in its own self
that the truth of its object is the universal. But this pure being
is not an immediacy, but something to which negation and
mediation are essential; consequently, it is not what we mean
by ‘being’, but is ‘being’ defined as an abstraction, or as the
pure universal; and our ‘meaning’, for which the true [content]
of sense-certainty is not the universal, is all that is left over in
face of this empty or indifferent Now and Here.

100. When we compare the relation in which knowing and
the object first came on the scene, with the relation in which
they now stand in this result, we find that it is reversed. The
object, which was supposed to be the essential element in sense-
certainty, is now the unessential element; for the universal
which the object has come to be is no longer what the object
was supposed essentially to be for sense-certainty. On the con¬
trary, the certainty is now to be found in the opposite element,
viz. in knowing, which previously was the unessential element.
Its truth is in the object as my object, or in its being mine
[Meinen\ ; it is, because / know it. Sense-certainty, then, though
indeed expelled from the object, is not yet thereby overcome,
but only driven back into the ‘I’. We have now to see what
experience shows us about its reality in the ‘I’.

101. The force of its truth thus lies now in the ‘I’, in the
immediacy of my seeing , hearing , and so on; the vanishing of the
single Now and Here that we mean is prevented by the fact
that / hold them fast. ‘Now’ is day because I see it; ‘Here’ is
a tree for the same reason. But in this relationship sense-cer¬
tainty experiences the same dialectic acting upon itself as in
the previous one. I, this T, see the tree and assert that ‘Here’
is a tree; but another ‘T sees the house and maintains that
‘Here’ is not a tree but a house instead. Both truths have the
same authentication, viz. the immediacy of seeing, and the cer¬
tainty and assurance that both have about their knowing; but
the one truth vanishes in the other.


62 A. CONSCIOUSNESS

102. What does not disappear in all this is the T as universal ,
whose seeing is neither a seeing of the tree nor of this house,
but is a simple seeing which, though mediated by the negation
of this house, etc., is all the same simple and indifferent to what¬
ever happens in it, to the house, the tree, etc. The T is merely
universal like ‘Now’, ‘Here’, or ‘This’ in general; I do indeed
mean a single T, but I can no more say what I mean in the case
of T than I can in the case of‘Now’ and ‘Here’. When I say
‘this Here’, ‘this Now’, or a ‘single item’, I am saying all Thises,
Heres, Nows, all single items. Similarly, when I say ‘I’, this
singular ‘I’, I say in general all ‘Is’; everyone is what I say,
everyone is ‘I’, this singular ‘I’. When Science is faced with the
demand—as if it were an acid test it could not pass—that it
should deduce, construct, find a priori , or however it is put,
something called ‘this thing’ or ‘this one man , it is reasonable
that the demand should say which this thing , or which this
particular man’ is meant ; but it is impossible to say this.

103. Sense-certainty thus comes to know by experience that
its essence is neither in the object nor in the T, and that its imme¬
diacy is neither an immediacy of the one nor of the other; for
in both, what I mean is rather something unessential, and the
object and the T are universal in which that ‘Now’ and ‘Here’
and T which I mean do not have a continuing being, or are
not. Thus we reach the stage where we have to posit the whole
of sense-certainty itself as its essence, and no longer only one of
its moments, as happened in the two cases where first the object
confronting the T, and then the ‘I’, were supposed to be its
reality. Thus it is only sense-certainty as a whole which stands
firm within itself as immediacy and by so doing excludes from
itself all the opposition which has hitherto obtained.

104. This pure immediacy, therefore, no longer has any
concern with the otherness of the ‘Here’, as a tree which passes
over into a ‘Here’ that is not a tree, or with the otherness of
the ‘Now’ as day which changes into a ‘Now’ that is night,
or with another ‘I’ for which something else is object. Its truth
preserves itself as a relation that remains self-identical, and
which makes no distinction of what is essential and what is un¬
essential, between the ‘I’ and the object, a relation therefore into
which also no distinction whatever can penetrate. I, this ‘I’,
assert then the ‘Here’ as a tree, and do not turn round so that




SENSE-CERTAINTY


63

the Here would become for me not a tree; also, I take no notice
of the fact that another ‘I’ sees the Here as not a tree, or that
I myself at another time take the Here as not-tree, the Now
as not-day. On the contrary, I am a pure [act of] intuiting;
I, for my part, stick to the fact that the Now is day, or that
the Here is a tree, also I do not compare Here and Now them¬
selves with one another, but stick firmly to one immediate rela¬
tion: the Now is day.

I0 5- Since, then, this certainty will no longer come forth to
us when we direct its attention to a Now that is night, or to
an T to whom it is night, we will approach it and let ourselves
point to the Now that is asserted. We must let ourselves point
to it; for the truth of this immediate relation is the truth of this
‘I 5 which confines itself to one ‘Now’ or one ‘Here’. Were we
to examine this truth afterwards , or stand at a distance from it,
it would lose its significance entirely; for that would do away
with the immediacy which is essential to it. We must therefore
enter the same point of time or space, point them out to our¬
selves, i.e. make ourselves into the same singular T which is
the one who knows with certainty. Let us, then, see how that
immediate is constituted that is pointed out to us.

106. The Now is pointed to, this Now. ‘Now 5 ; it has already
ceased to be in the act of pointing to it. The Now that is, is
another Now than the one pointed to, and we see that the Now
is just this: to be no more just when it i s s. The Now, as it is
pointed out to us, is Now that has been , and this is its truth;
it has not the truth of being. Yet this much is true, that it has
been. But what essentially has been [gewesen ist] is, in fact, not
an essence that is [kein Wesen\; it is not , and it was with being
that we were concerned.

107. In this pointing-out, then, we see merely a movement
which takes the following course: (1) I point out the ‘Now’,
and it is asserted to be the truth. I point it out, however, as
something that has been , or as something that has been super¬
seded; I set aside the first truth. (2) I now assert as the second
truth that it has been , that it is superseded. (3) But what has
been, is not; I set aside the second truth, its having been , its super-
session, and thereby negate the negation of the ‘Now’, and thus
return to the first assertion, that the ‘ Now ’ is. The ‘Now’, and
pointing out the ‘Now’, are thus so constituted that neither the


A. CONSCIOUSNESS


64

one nor the other is something immediate and simple, but a
movement which contains various moments. A This is posited;
but it is rather an other that is posited, or the This is superseded:
and this otherness, or the setting-aside of the first, is itself in turn
set aside, and so has returned into the first. However, this first,
thus reflected into itself, is not exactly the same as it was to
begin with, viz. something immediate-, on the contrary, it is some¬
thing that is reflected into itself, or a simple entity which, in its other¬
ness, remains what it is: a Now which is an absolute plurality
of Nows. And this is the true, the genuine Now, the Now as
asimpleday which contains within it many Nows—hours. A Now
of this sort, an hour, similarly is many minutes, and this Now
is likewise many Nows, and so on. The pointing-out of the Now
is thus itself the movement which expresses what the Now is
in truth, viz. a result, ora plurality of Nows all taken together;
and the pointing-out is the experience of learning that Now is
a universal.

108. The Here pointed out, to which I hold fast, is similarly
a this Here which, in fact, is not this Here, but a Before and
Behind, an Above and Below, a Right and Left. The Above
is itself similarly this manifold otherness of above, below, etc.
The Here, which was supposed to have been pointed out,
vanishes in other Heres, but these likewise vanish. What is
pointed out, held fast, and abides, is a negative This, which is
negative only when the Heres are taken as they should be, but,
in being so taken, they supersede themselves; what abides is
a simple complex of many Heres. The Here that is meant would
be the point; but it is not: on the contrary, when it is pointed
out as something that is, the pointing-out shows itself to be not
an immediate knowing [of the point], but a movement from
the Here that is meant through many Heres into the universal
Here which is a simple plurality of Heres, just as the day is a
simple plurality of Nows.

109. It is clear that the dialectic of sense-certainty is nothing
else but the simple history of its movement or of its experience,
and sense-certainty itself is nothing else but just this history.
That is why the natural consciousness, too, is always reaching
this result, learning from experience what is true in it; but
equally it is always forgetting it and starting the movement all
over again. It is therefore astonishing when, in face of this ex-




SENSE.CERTAINTY


65

perience, it is asserted as universal experience and put forward,
too, as a philosophical proposition, even as the outcome of
Scepticism, that the reality or being of external things taken
as Thises or sense-objects has absolute truth for consciousness.
To make such an assertion is not to know what one is saying,
to be unaware that one is saying the opposite of what one wants
to say. The truth for consciousness of a This of sense is supposed
to be universal experience; but the very opposite is universal
experience. Every consciousness itself supersedes such a truth,
as e.g. Here is a tree, or, Now is noon, and proclaims the oppo¬
site : Here is not a tree, but a house; and similarly, it immediately
again supersedes the assertion which set aside the first so far
as it is also just such an assertion of a sensuous This. And what
consciousness will learn from experience in all sense-certainty
is, in truth, only what we have seen viz. the This as a universal ,
the very opposite of what that assertion affirmed to be universal
experience.

With this appeal to universal experience we may be per¬
mitted to anticipate how the case stands in the practical sphere.
In this respect we can tell those who assert the truth and cer¬
tainty of the reality of sense-objects that they should go back
to the most elementary school of wisdom, viz. the ancient Eleu-
sinian Mysteries of Ceres and Bacchus, and that they have still to
learn the secret meaning of the eating of bread and the drinking
of wine. For he who is initiated into these Mysteries not only
comes to doubt the being of sensuous things, but to despair of
it; in part he brings about the nothingness of such things himself
in his dealings with them, and in part he sees them reduce them¬
selves to nothingness. Evdh the animals are not shut out from
this wisdom but, on the contrary, show themselves to be most
profoundly initiated into it; for they do not just stand idly in
front of sensuous things as if these possessed intrinsic being, but,
despairing of their reality, and completely assured of their
nothingness, they fall to without ceremony and eat them up.
And all Nature, like the animals, celebrates these open Mys¬
teries which teach the truth about sensuous things.

110. But, just as our previous remarks would suggest, those
who put forward such an assertion also themselves say the direct
opposite of what they mean : a phenomenon which is perhaps
best calculated to induce them to reflect on the nature of sense-


66


A. CONSCIOUSNESS


certainty. They speak of the existence of external objects, which
can be more precisely defined as actual , absolutely singular ,
wholly personal , individual things, each of them absolutely unlike
anything else; this existence, they say, has absolute certainty
and truth. They mean ‘this 5 bit of paper on which I am writing—
or rather have written—‘this’; but what they mean is not what
they say. If they actually wanted to say ‘this’ bit of paper which
they mean, if they wanted to say it, then this is impossible,
because the sensuous This that is meant cannot be reached by lan¬
guage, which belongs to consciousness, i.e. to that which is in¬
herently universal. In the actual attempt to say it, it would
therefore crumble away; those who started to describe it would
not be able to complete the description, but would be compelled
to leave it to others, who would themselves finally have to admit
to speaking about something which is not. They certainly mean,
then, this bit of paper here which is quite different from the
bit mentioned above; but they say ‘actual things ', ‘external or
sensuous objects ', f absolutely singular entities' [ Wesen\ and so on •
i.e. they say of them only what is universal. Consequently, what
is called the unutterable is nothing else than the untrue the
irrational, what is merely meant [but is not actually expressed]
If nothing more is said of something than that it is ‘an actual
thing’, an ‘external object’, its description is only the most
abstract of generalities and in fact expresses its sameness with
everything rather than its distinctiveness. When I say: ‘a single
thing’, I am really saying what it is from a wholly universal
point of view, for everything is a single thing; and likewise ‘this
thing’ is anything you like. If we describe it more exactly as
‘this bit of paper’, then each and every bit of paper is ‘this bit
of paper’, and I have only uttered the universal all the time.
But if I want to help out language—which has the divine nature
of directly reversing the meaning of what is said, of making it
into something else, and thus not letting what is meant get into
words at all by pointing out this bit of paper, exDerienre



‘to perceive’ is wahrnehmen which means literally ‘to take truly’




PERCEPTION


67


II. PERCEPTION: OR THE THING AND
DECEPTION

111. Immediate certainty does not take over the truth, for
its truth is the universal, whereas certainty wants to apprehend
the This. Perception, on the other hand, takes what is present
to it as a universal. Just as universality is its principle in general,
the immediately self-differentiating moments within percep¬
tion are universal: T is a universal and the object is a universal.
That principle has arisen for us, and therefore the way we take
in perception is no longer something that just happens to us
like sense-certainty; on the contrary, it is logically necessitated.
With the emergence of the principle, the two moments which
in their appearing merely occur , also come into being: one being
the movement of pointing-out or the act of perceiving , the other
being the same movement as a simple event or the object perceived.
In essence the object is the same as the movement: the move¬
ment is the unfolding and differentiation of the two moments,
and the object is the apprehended togetherness of the moments.
For us, or in itself, the universal as principle is the essence of
perception, and, in contrast to this abstraction, both the
moments distinguished—that which perceives and that which
is perceived—are the unessential. But, in fact, because both are
themselves the universal or the essence, both are essential. Yet
since they are related to each other as opposites, only one can
be the essential moment in the relation, and the distinction of
essential and unessential moment must be shared between
them. One of them, the object, defined as the simple [entity],
is the essence regardless of whether it is perceived or not; but
the act of perceiving, as a movement, is the unessential moment,
the unstable factors which can as well be as not be.

112. This object must now be defined more precisely, and the
definition must be developed briefly from the result that has
been reached; the more detailed development does not belong
here. Since the principle of the object, the universal, is in its
simplicity a mediated universal, the object must express this its
nature in its own self. This it does by showing itself to be the
thing with many properties. The wealth of sense-knowledge belongs
to perception, not to immediate certainty, for which it was only
the source of instances; for only perception contains negation,
that is, difference or manifoldness, within its own essence.


68 A. CONSCIOUSNESS

113. The This is, therefore, established as not This, or as some¬
thing superseded; and hence not as Nothing, but as a determi¬
nate Nothing, the Nothing of a content, viz. of the This. Con¬
sequently, the sense-element is still present, but not in the way
it was supposed to be in [the position of] immediate certainty:
not as the singular item that is ‘meant , but as a universal, or
as that which will be defined as a property. Supersession exhibits
its true twofold meaning which we have seen in the negative :
it is at once a negating and a preserving. Our Nothing, as the Noth¬
ing of the This, preserves its immediacy and is itself sensuous,
but it is a universal immediacy. Being, however, is a universal
in virtue of its having mediation or the negative within it; when
it expresses this in its immediacy it is a differentiated , determinate
property. As a result many such properties are established simul¬
taneously, one being the negative of another. Since they are
expressed in the simplicity of the universal, these deter-
minacies—which are properties strictly speaking only through
the addition of a further determination—are related [only] to
themselves; they are indifferent to one another, each is on its
own and free from the others. But the simple, self-identical uni¬
versality is itselfin turn distinct and free from these determinate
properties it has. It is pure relating of self to self, or the medium
in which all these determinacies are, and in which as a simple
unity they therefore interpenetrate, but without coming into con¬
tact with one another; for it is precisely through participating
in this universality that they exist indifferently on their own
account.

This abstract universal medium, which can be called simply
‘thinghood’ or ‘pure essence’, is nothing else than what Here
and Now have proved themselvess to be, viz. a simple togetherness
of a plurality; but the many are, in their determinateness, simple
universal themselves. This salt is a simple Here, and at the
same time manifold; it is white and also tart, also cubical in
shape, of a specific gravity, etc. All these many properties are
in a single simple ‘Here’, in which, therefore, they inter¬
penetrate; none has a different Here from the others, but each
is everywhere, in the same Here in which the others are. And,
at the same time, without being separated by different Heres,
they do not affect each other in this interpenetration. The
whiteness does not affect the cubical shape, and neither affects





PERCEPTION


69

the tart taste, etc.; on the contrary, since each is itself a simple
relating of self to self it leaves the others alone, and is connected
with them only by the indifferent Also. This Also is thus the
pure universal itself, or the medium, the ‘thinghood 5 , which
holds them together in this way.

114. In the relationship which has thus emerged it is only
the character of positive universality that is at first observed
and developed; but a further side presents itself, which must
also be taken into consideration. To wit, if the many determi¬
nate properties were strictly indifferent to one another, if they
were simply and solely self-related, they would not be determi¬
nate ; for they are only determinate in so far as they differentiate
themselves from one another, and relate themselves to others as
to their opposites. Yet; as thus opposed to one another they
cannot be together in the simple unity of their medium, which
is just as essential to them as negation; the differentiation of
the properties, in so far as it is not an indifferent differentiation
but is exclusive, each property negating the others, thus falls
outside of this simple medium; and the medium, therefore, is
not merely an Also, an indifferent unity, but a One as well, a
unity which excludes an other. The One is the moment of negation ;
it is itself quite simply a relation of self to self and it excludes
an other; and it is that by which ‘thinghood 5 is determined as
a Thing. Negation is inherent in a property as a determinateness
which is immediately one with the immediacy of being, an
immediacy which, through this unity with negation, is uni¬
versality. As a One, however, the determinateness is set free
from this unity with its opposite, and exists in and for itself.

115. In these moments, taken together, the Thing as the
truth of perception is completed, so far as it is necessary to de¬
velop it here. It is (a) an indifferent, passive universality, the
Also of the many properties or rather ‘matters 5 ; (b) negation,
equally simply; or the One , which excludes opposite properties;
and (c) the many properties themselves, the relation of the first
two moments, or negation as it relates to the indifferent ele¬
ment, and therein expands into a host of differences; the point
ofsingular individuality in the medium of subsistence radiating
forth into plurality. In so far as these differences belong to the
indifferent medium they are themselves universal, they are
related only to themselves and do not affect one another. But


?o


A. CONSCIOUSNESS


in so far as they belong to the negative unity they are at the
same time exclusive [of other properties]; but they necessarily
have this relationship of opposition to properties remote from
their Also. The sensuous universality, or the immediate unity of
being and the negative, is thus a property only when the One
and the pure universality are developed from it and differenti¬
ated from each other, and when the sensuous universality unites
them; it is this relation of the universality to the pure essential
moments which at last completes the Thing.

116. This, then, is how the Thing of perception is con¬
stituted; and consciousness is determined as percipient in so far
as this Thing is its object. It has only to take it, to confine itself
to a pure apprehension of it, and what is thus yielded is the
True. If consciousness itself did anything ip taking what is
given, it would by such adding or subtraction alter the truth.
Since'the object is the True and universal, the self-identical,
while consciousness is alterable and unessential, it can happen
that consciousness apprehends the object incorrectly and
deceives itself The percipient is aware of the possibility of de¬
ception; for in the universality which is the principle, otherness
itself is immediately present for him, though present as what
is null and superseded. His criterion of truth is therefore self-
identity , and his behaviour consists in apprehending the object
as self-identical. Since at the same time diversity is explicitly
there for him, it is a connection of the diverse moments of his
apprehension to one another; but if a dissimilarity makes itself
felt in the course of this comparison, then this is not an untruth
of the object—for this is the self-identical—but an untruth in
perceiving it.

117. Let us see now what consciousness experiences in its
actual perceiving. For us , this experience is already contained
in the development of the object, and of the attitude of con¬
sciousness towards it given just now. It is only a matter of de¬
veloping the contradictions that are present therein. The object
which I apprehend presents itself purely as a One\ but I also
perceive in it a property which is universal , and which thereby
transcends the singularity [of the object]. The first being of the
objective essence as a One was therefore not its true being. But
since the objects what is true, the untruth falls in me; my appre¬
hension was not correct. On account of the universality of the





PERCEPTION


7 1

property, I must rather take the objective essence to be on the
whole a community. I now further perceive the property to be
determinate , opposed to another and excluding it. Thus I did not
in fact apprehend the objective essence correctly when I defined
** as a cornmum ty with others, or as a continuity; on account
Oi the determinateness of the property, I must break up the
continuity and posit the objective essence as a One that
excludes.

In the broken up One I find many such properties which
do not afifect one another but are mutually indifferent. There¬
fore, I did not perceive the object correctly when I apprehended
it as exclusive; on the contrary, just as previouly it was only
continuity in general, so now it is a universal common medium
in which many properties are present as sensuous universalities ,
each existing on its own account and, as determinate , excluding
the others. But this being so, what I perceive as the simple and
the True is also not a universal medium, but the single property
by itself which, however, as such, is neither a property nor a
determinate being; for now it is neither in a One nor connected
with others. Only when it belongs to a One is it a property,
and only in relation to others is it determinate. As this pure
relating of itself to itself, it remains merely sensuous being in
general, since it no longer possesses the character of negativity;
and the consciousness which takes its object to be a sensuous
being is only ‘my’ meaning [ein Meinen\ , i.e. it has ceased alto¬
gether to perceive and has withdrawn into itself. But sensuous
being and my meaning themselves pass over into perception:

I am thrown back to the beginning and drawn once again into
the same cycle which supersedes itself in each moment and as
a whole.

118. Consciousness, therefore, necessarily runs through this
cycle again, but this time not in the same way as it did the first
time. For it has experienced in perception that the outcome
and the truth of perception is its dissolution, or is reflection out
of the True and into itself. Thus it becomes quite definite for
consciousness how its perceiving is essentially constituted,
viz. that it is not a simple pure apprehension, but in its apprehen¬
sion is at the same time reflected out of the True and into itself. This
return of consciousness into itself which is directly mingled with
the pure apprehension [of the object]—for this return into itself


J2 A. CONSCIOUSNESS

has shown itself to be essential to perception—alters the truth.
Consciousness at once recognizes this aspect as its own and takes
responsibility for it; by doing so it will obtain the true object
in its purity. This being so, we have now in the case of percep¬
tion the same as happened in the case of sense-certainty, the
aspect of consciousness being driven back into itself; but not,
in the first instance, in the sense in which this happened in
sense-certainty, i.e. not as if the truth of perception fell in con¬
sciousness. On the contrary, consciousness recognizes that it is
the untruth occurring in perception that falls within it. But by
this very recognition it is able at once to supersede this untruth;
it distinguishes its apprehension of the truth from the untruth
of its perception, corrects this untruth, and since it undertakes
to make this correction itself, the truth, qua truth of perception ,
falls of course within consciousness. The behaviour of conscious¬
ness which we have now to consider is thus so constituted that
consciousness no longer merely perceives, but is also conscious
ofits reflection into itself, and separates this from simple appre¬
hension proper.

119. At first, then, I become aware of the Thing as a One ,
and have to hold fast to it in this its true character; if, in the
course of perceiving it, something turns up which contradicts
it, this is to be recognized as a reflection of mine. Now, there
also occur in the perception various properties which seem to
be properties of the Thing; but the Thing is a One, and we are
conscious that this diversity by which it would cease to be a
One falls in us. So in point of fact, the Thing is white only to
our eyes , also tart to our tongue, also cubical to our touch, and
so on. We get the entire diversity of these aspects, not from the
Thing, but from ourselves; and they fall asunder in this way
for us, because the eye is quite distinct from the tongue, and
so on. We are thus the universal medium in which such moments
are kept apart and exist each on its own. Through the fact, then,
that we regard the characteristic of being a universal medium
as our reflection, we preserve the self-identity and truth of the
Thing, its being a One.

120. But, regarded as existing each for itself in the universal
medium, these diverse aspects for which consciousness accepts re¬
sponsibility are specifically determined. White is white only in
opposition to black, and so on, and the Thing is a One precisely






PERCEPTION


73

by being opposed to others. But it is not as a One that it excludes
others from itself, for to be a One is the universal relating of
self to self, and the fact that it is a One rather makes it like
all the others; it is through its determinateness that the thing
excludes others. Things are therefore in and for themselves
determinate; they have properties by which they distinguish
themselves from others. Since the property [Eigenschaft] is the
Thing’s own [eigene ] property or a determinateness in the Thing
itself, the Thing has a number of properties. For, in the first
place, the Thing is what is true, i.e. it possesses intrinsic being;
and what is in it, is there as the Thing’s essence, and not on
account of other things. Secondly, therefore, the determinate
properties do not only exist on account of other things and for
other things, but in the Thing itself; yet they are determinate
properties in it only because they are a plurality of reciprocally
self-differentiating elements. And thirdly, since this is how they
are in the ‘thinghood’ [i.e. the essence of the one thing of which
they are properties], they exist in and for themselves, indifferent
to one another. It is in truth, then, the Thing itself that is white,
and also cubical, also tart, and so on. In other words, the Thing
is the Also, or the universal medium in which the many properties
subsist apart from one another, without touching or cancelling
one another; and when so taken, the Thing is perceived as what
is true.

121. Now, in perceiving in this way, consciousness is at the
same time aware that it is also reflected into itself, and that,
in perceiving, the opposite moment to the Also turns up. But
this moment is the unity of the Thing with itself, a unity which
excludes difference from itself. Accordingly, it is this unity
which consciousness has to take upon itself; for the Thing itself
is the subsistence of the many diverse and independent properties. Thus
we say of the Thing: it is white, also cubical, and also tart, and
so on. But in so far as it is white, it is not cubical, and in so far
as it is cubical and also white, it is not tart, and so on. Positing
these properties as a oneness is the work of consciousness alone
which, therefore, has to prevent them from collapsing into one¬
ness in the Thing. To this end it brings in the ‘in so far’, in
this way preserving the properties as mutually external, and
the Thing as the Also. Quite rightly, consciousness makes itself
responsible for the oneness, at first in such a way that what was


74


A. CONSCIOUSNESS


called a property is represented as ‘free matter’. The Thing is
in this way raised to the level of a genuine Also, since it becomes
a collection of‘matters’ and, instead of being a One, becomes
merely an enclosing surface.

122. If we look back on what consciousness previously took,
and now takes, responsibility for, on what it previously
ascribed, and now ascribes, to the Thing, we see that conscious¬
ness alternately makes itself, as well as the Thing, into both a
pure, many-less One , and into an Also that resolves itself into
independent ‘matters’. Consciousness thus finds through this
comparison that not only its truthful perceiving [ Nehmen des
Wahreri] , contains the distinct moments of apprehension and with¬
drawal into itself but rather that the truth itself, the Thing,
reveals itself in this twofold way. Our experience, then, is this,
that the Thing exhibits itself for the consciousness apprehending it ,
in a specific manner, but is at the same time reflected out of the
way in which it presents itself to consciousness and back into
itself; in other words, it contains in its own self an opposite truth
[to that which it has for the apprehending consciousness].

123. Thus consciousness has got beyond this second type of
attitude in perceiving, too, i.e. the one in which it takes the
Thing as truly self-identical, and itself for what is not self-identi¬
cal but returns back into itself out of identity. The object is now
for consciousness this whole movement which was previously
shared between the object and consciousness. The Thing is a
One, reflected into itself; it is for itself but it is also for an other ;
and, moreover, it is an other on its own account, just because it
is for an other. Accordingly, the Thing is for itself and also for
an other, a being that is doubly differentiated but also a One;
but the oneness contradicts this diversity. Hence consciousness
would again have to assume responsibility for placing [the
diversity] in the One and for keeping it away from the Thing.
It would have to say that in so far as it is for itself, the Thing
is not for an other. But the oneness also belongs to the Thing
itself as consciousness has found by experience: the Thing is
essentially reflected into itself. The Also, or the indifferent dif¬
ference, thus falls as much within the Thing as does the oneness;
but since the two are different they do not fall within the same
Thing, but in different Things. The contradiction which is
present in the objective essence as a whole is distributed





PERCEPTION ?5

between two objects. In and for itself the Thing is self-identical
but this unity with itself is disturbed by other Things. Thus
the unity of the Thing is preserved and at the same time the
otherness is preserved outside of the Thing as well as outside
of consciousness.

124. Now, although it is true that the contradiction in the
objective essence is in this way distributed among different
Things, yet the difference will, for that reason, attach to the
singular separated Thing itself. The different Things are thus
established as existing on their own account; and the conflict
between them is so far reciprocal that each is different, not from
itself, but only from the other. But each is thereby determined
as being itself a different Thing, and it has its essential difference
in its own self; but ail the while not as if this difference were
an opposition in the Thing itself. On the contrary, for itself it
is a simple determinateness which constitutes the Thing’s essential
character, and differentiates it from others. As a matter of fact
since differentness is present in it, it is of course necessarily
present as an actual difference manfoldly constituted. But
because the determinateness constitutes the essence of the
Thing, by which it distinguishes itself from other Things and
is or itself, this further manifold constitution is the unessential
aspect. Consequently, the Thing does indeed have the twofold
in so far within its unity, but the aspects are unequal in value.
As a result, this state of opposition does not develop into an
actual opposition in the Thing itself, but in so far as the Thing
through its absolute difference comes into a state of opposition,
it is opposed to another Thing outside of it. Of course, the
further manifoldness is necessarily present in the Thing too, so
that it cannot be left out; but it is the unessential aspect of the
Thing.

I2 5 - This determinateness, which constitutes the essential
character of the Thing and distinguishes it from all others, is
now defined in such a way that the Thing is thereby in opposi¬
tion to other Things, but is supposed to preserve its indepen¬
dence in this opposition. But it is only a Thing, or a One that
exists on its own account, in so far as it does not stand in this
relation to others; for this relation establishes rather its conti¬
nuity with others, and for it to be connected with others is to
cease to exist on its own account. It is just through the absolute



y6 A. CONSCIOUSNESS

character of the Thing and its opposition that it relates itself to
others, and is essentially only this relating. The relation, how-
ever, is the negation of its self-subsistence, and it is really the
essential property of the Thing that is its undoing.

126. The conceptual necessity of the experience throug
which consciousness discovers that the Thing is demolished by
the very determinateness that constitutes its essence and its
being-for-self, can be summarized as follows. The Thing is
posited as being/or itself, or as the absolute negation of all other¬
ness, therefore as purely self- related negation; but the negation
that is self-related is the suspension of itself', in other words, the
Thing has its essential being in another Thing.

127. In fact, the definition of the object, as it has emerged,
has shown itself to contain nothing else. The object is defined
as having within it an essential property which constitutes its
simple being-for-self; but along with this simple nature the
object is also to contain diversity which, though necessary, is not
to constitute its essential determinateness. This, however, is a
distinction that is still only nominal; the unessential, which is
none the less supposed to be necessary, cancels itself out. It is
what has just been called the negation of itself.

128. With this, the last ‘in so far’ that separated being-for-
self from being-for-another falls away; on the contrary, the
object is in one and the same respect the opposite of itself, it is for itself,
so far as it is for another, and it is for another, so far as it is for itself
It is for itself, reflected into itself, a One; but this ‘for-itself,
this reflection into itself, this being a One, is posited in a unity
with its opposite, with its ‘being-for-another , and hence only
as cancelled; in other words, this being-for-self is just as unessen¬
tial as the only aspect that was supposed to be unessential, viz.
the relationship to another.

129. Thus the object in its pure determinatenesses, or in the
determinatenesses which were supposed to constitute its essen¬
tial being, is overcome just as surely as it was in its sensuous
being. From a sensuous being it turned into a universal; but
this universal, since it originates in the sensuous, is essentially con¬
ditioned by it, and hence is not truly a self-identical universality
at all, but one afflicted with an opposition', for this reason the uni¬
versality splits into the extremes of singular individuality and
universality, into the One of the properties, ano the Also of the





PERCEPTION


77


Tree matters’. These pure determinatenesses seem to express the
essential nature itself, but they are only a c being-for-self that
is burdened with a ‘being-for-another’. Since, however, both
are essentially in a single unity , what we now have is unconditioned
absolute universality , and consciousness here for the first time truly
enters the realm of the Understanding.

130. Thus the singular being of sense does indeed vanish in
the dialectical movement of immediate certainty and becomes
universality, but it is only a sensuous universality. My ‘meaning’
has vanished, and perception takes the object as it is in itself *
or as a universal as such. Singular being therefore emerges in the
object as true singleness, as the in-itselfof the One, or as a reflec-
tedness-into-self. But this is still a conditioned being-for-self along¬
side which appears another being-for-self, the universality which
is opposed to, and conditioned by singular being. But these two
contradictory extremes are not merely alongside each other but
in a single unity, or in other words, the defining characteristic
common to both, viz. ‘being-for-self, is burdened with opposi¬
tion generally, i.e. it is at the same time not a ‘being-for-self.
The sophistry of perception seeks to save these moments from
their contradiction, and it seeks to lay hold on the truth, by
distinguishing between the aspects , by sticking to the ‘Also’ and
to the ‘in so far’, and finally, by distinguishing the ‘unessential’
aspect from an ‘essence’ which is opposed to it. But these
expedients, instead of warding off deception in the process of
apprehension, prove themselves on the contrary to be quite
empty; and the truth which is supposed to be won by this logic
of the perceptual process proves to be in one and the same re¬
spect the opposite [of itself] and thus to have as its essence a
universality which is devoid of distinctions and determinations.

131. These empty abstractions of a ‘singleness’ and a ‘uni¬
versality’ opposed to it, and of an ‘essence’ that is linked with
something unessential—a ‘non-essential’ aspect which is neces¬
sary all the same—these are powers whose interplay is the per¬
ceptual understanding, often called ‘sound common sense’.
This ‘sound common sense’ which takes itself to be a solid, real¬
istic consciousness is, in the perceptual process, only the play
of these abstractions’, generally, it is always at its poorest where
it fancies itself to be the richest. Bandied about by these vacuous
‘essences’, thrown into the arms first of one and then of the


A. CONSCIOUSNESS


78

other, and striving by its sophistry to hold fast and affirm altern¬
ately first one of the ‘essences’ and then the directly opposite
one, it sets itself against the truth and holds the opinion that
philosophy is concerned only with mental entities. As a matter
of fact, philosophy does have to do with them too, recognizing
them as the pure essences, the absolute elements and powers;
but in doing so, recognizes them in their specific determinateness
as well, and is therefore master over them, whereas perceptual
understanding [or ‘sound common sense’] takes them for the
truth and is led on by them from one error to another. It does
not itself become conscious that it is simple essentialities of this
kind that hold sway over it, but fancies that it has always to
do with wholly substantial material and content; just as sense-
certainty is unaware that the empty abstraction of pure being
is its essence. But it is, in fact, these essentialities within which
perceptual understanding runs to and fro through every kind
of material and content; they are the cohesive power and mas¬
tery over that content and they alone are what the sensuous
is as essence for consciousness, they are what determines the rela¬
tions of the sensuous to it, and it is in them that the process
of perception and of its truth runs its course. This course, a per¬
petual alternation of determining what is true, and then setting
aside this determining, constitutes, strictly speaking, the steady
everyday life and activity of perceptual consciousness, a con¬
sciousness which fancies itself to be moving in the realm of truth.
It advances uninterruptedly to the outcome in which all these
essential essentialities or determinations are equally set
aside; but in each single moment it is conscious only of this one
determinateness as the truth, and then in turn of the opposite one.
It does indeed suspect their unessentiality, and to save them
from the danger threatening them it resorts to the sophistry of
asserting to be true what it has itselfjust declared to be untrue.
What the nature of these untrue essences is really trying to get
[perceptual] understanding to do is to bring together , and
thereby supersede, the thoughts of those non-entities, the
thoughts of that universality and singular being, of‘Also’ and
‘One’, of the essentiality that is necessarily linked to the unessen¬
tial moment, and of an unessential moment that yet is neces¬
sary. But the Understanding struggles to avoid doing this by
resorting to ‘in so far as’ and to the various ‘aspects’, or by mak-





FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING 79

ing itself responsible for one thought in order to keep the other
one isolated as the true one. But the very nature of these abstrac¬
tions brings them together of their own accord. It is ‘sound com¬
mon sense’ that is the prey of these abstractions, which spin
it round and round in their whirling circle. When common
sense tries to make them true by at one time making itself re¬
sponsible for their untruth, while at another time it calls their
deceptiveness a semblance of the unreliability of Things, and
separates what is essential from what is necessary to them yet
supposedly unessential, holding the former to be their truth as
against the latter—when it does this, it does not secure them
their truth, but convicts itself of untruth.


III. FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING:
APPEARANCE AND THE SUPERSENSIBLE

WORLD

132. In the dialectic of sense-certainty, Seeing and Hearing
have been lost to consciousness; and, as perception, conscious¬
ness has arrived at thoughts, which it brings together for the
first time in the unconditioned universal. This, now, if it were
taken as an inert simple essence, would itself in turn be nothing
else than the one-sided extreme of being-for-self for it would then
be confronted by non-essence; but, if it were related to this,
it would itself be unessential, and consciousness would not have
escaped from the deceptions of the perceptual process. How¬
ever, this universal has proved to be one which has returned
into itself out of such a conditioned being-for-self. This un¬
conditioned universal, which is now the true object of con¬
sciousness, is still just an object for it; consciousness has not yet
grasped the Notion of the unconditioned as Notion. It is essential
to distinguish the two: for consciousness, the object has returned
into itself from its relation to an other and has thus become
Notion in principle ; but consciousness is not yet for its-elf the
Notion, and consequently does not recognize itself in that re¬
flected object. For us , this object has developed through the
movement of consciousness in such a way that consciousness
is involved in that development, and the reflection is the same
on both sides, or, there is only one reflection. But since in this



8o


A. CONSCIOUSNESS


movement consciousness has for its content merely the objective
essence and not consciousness as such, the result must have an
objective significance for consciousness; consciousness still
shrinks away from what has emerged, and takes it as the essence
in the objective sense.

133. With this, the Understanding has indeed superseded its
own untruth and the untruth of the object. What has emerged
for it as a result is the Notion of the True—but only as the implicit
being of the True, which is not yet Notion, or which lacks the
bring-for-self of consciousness, and which the Understanding,
without knowing itself therein, lets go its own way. This truth
follows out its own essence, so that consciousness plays no part
in its free realization, but merely looks on and simply appre¬
hends it. To begin with, therefore, we must step into its place
and be the Notion which develops and fills out what is con¬
tained in the result. It is through awareness of this completely
developed object, which presents itself to consciousness as some¬
thing that immediately is , that consciousness first becomes
explicitly a consciousness that comprehends [its object].

134. The result was the unconditioned universal, initially,
in the negative and abstract sense that consciousness negated
its one-sided Notions and abstracted them: in other words, it
gave them up. But the result has, implicitly, a positive signifi¬
cance: in it, the unity of ‘being-for-self’ and ‘being-for-another’
is posited; in other words, the absolute antithesis is posited as
a self-identical essence. At first sight, this seems to concern only
the form of the moments in reciprocal relation; but ‘being-for-
self’ and ‘being-for-another’ are the content itself as well, since
the antithesis in its truth can have no other nature than the
one yielded in the result, viz. that the content taken in percep¬
tion to be true, belongs in fact only to the form, in the unity
of which it is dissolved. This content is likewise universal; there
can be no other content which by its particular constitution
would fail to fall within this unconditioned universality. A con¬
tent of this kind would be some particular way or other of being
for itself and of being in relation to an other. But, in general
to be for itself and to be in relation to an other constitutes the
nature and essence of the content, whose truth consists in its
being unconditionally universal; and the result is simply and
solely universal.







FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING


81


135. But because this unconditioned universal is an object
for consciousness, there emerges in it the distinction of form and
content; and in the shape of content the moments look like
they did when they first presented themselves: on one side, a
universal medium of many subsistent ‘matters’, and on the
other side, a One reflected into itself, in which their indepen¬
dence is extinguished. The former is the dissolution of the
Thing’s independence, i.e. the passivity that is a being-for-
another; the latter is being-for-self. We have to see how these
moments exhibit themselves in the unconditioned universality
which is their essence. It is clear at the outset that, since they
exist only in this universality, they are no longer separated from
one another at all but are in themselves essentially self-supersed¬
ing aspects, and what is posited is only their transition into one
another.

136. One moment, then, appears as the essence that has
stepped to one side as a universal medium, or as the subsistence
of independent ‘matters’. But the independence of these ‘mat¬
ters’ is nothing else than this medium; in other words, the [un¬
conditioned] universal is simply and solely the plurality of the
diverse universals of this kind. That within itself the universal
is in undivided unity with this plurality means, however, that
these ‘matters’ are each where the other is; they mutually inter¬
penetrate, but without coming into contact with one another
because, conversely, the many diverse ‘matters’ are equally in¬
dependent. This also means that they are absolutely porous,
or are sublated. This sublation in its turn, this reduction of the
diversity to a pure being-for-self\ is nothing other than the
medium itself, and this is the independence of the different ‘mat¬
ters’. In oher words, the ‘matters’ posited as independent
directly pass over into their unity, and their unity directly un¬
folds its diversity, and this once again reduces itself to unity.
But this movement is what is called Force. One of its moments,
the dispersal of the independent ‘matters’ in their [immediate]
being, is the expression of Force; but Force, taken as that in which
they have disappeared, is Force proper , Force which has been
driven back into itself from its expression. First, however, the
Force which is driven back into itself must express itself; and,
secondly, it is still Force remaining within itself In the expression,
just as much as it is expression in this self-containedness.


82


A. CONSCIOUSNESS


When we thus preserve the two moments in their immediate
unity, the Understanding, to which the Notion of Force
belongs, is strictly speaking the Notion which sustains the dif¬
ferent moments qua different; for, in themselves , they are not sup¬
posed to be different. Consequently, the difference exists only
in thought. That is to say, what.has been posited in the fore¬
going is in the first instance only the Notion of Force, not its
reality. In point of fact, however, Force is the unconditioned
universal which is equally in its own self what it is for an other\
or which contains the difference in its own self—for difference
is nothing else than being-Jor-another. In order, then, that Force
may in truth be , it must be completely set free from thought,
it must be posited as the substance of these differences, i .e. first
the substance , as this whole Force, remaining essentially in and
for itself and then its differences as possessing substantial being , or
as moments existing on their own account. Force as such, or
as driven back into itself, thus exists on its own account as an
exclusive One , for which the unfolding of the [different] ‘matters’
is another subsisting essence; and thus two distinct independent
aspects are set up. But Force is also the whole, i.e. it remains
what it is according to its Notion; that is to say, these differences
remain pure forms, superficial vanishing moments. At the same
time there would be no difference at all between Force proper
which has been driven back into itself, and Force unfolded into
independent ‘matters’, if they had no enduring being, or, there
would be no Force if it did not exist in these opposite ways.
But that it does exist in these opposite ways simply means
that the two moments are at the same time themselves in¬
dependent. It is therefore this movement of the two moments
m P er P et ually give themselves independence

an t en supersede themselves again which we are now to
consider.

In general, it is clear that this movement is nothing else than
the movement of perceiving, in which the two sides, the per-
ap ie nt and what is perceived, are indistinguishably one in the
apprehension of the True, and yet each side is at the same time
equally reflected into itself or has a being of its own Here these
two sides are moments of Force; they are just as much in a unity,
as this unity, which appears as the middle term over against
the independent extremes, is a perpetual diremption of itself






FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING 83

into just these extremes which exist only through this process.
Thus the movement which previously displayed itself as the self-
destruction of contradictory Notions here has objective form and
is the movement of Force, the outcome of which is the un¬
conditioned universal as something not objective, or as the inner
being of Things.

1 37 * Force, as thus determined, since it is conceived as Force
or as rejiected into itself\ is one side of its Notion, but posited as
a substantial extreme and, moreover, with the express character

a O ne - The subsistence of the unfolded ‘matters 5 outside of
Force is thus precluded and is something other than Force.
Since it is necessary that Force itself he this subsistence , or that
it express itself, its expression presents itself in this wise, that the
said ‘other 5 approaches it and solicits it. But, as a matter of fact,
since its expression is necessary , what is posited as another essence
is in Force itself. We must retract the assertion that Force is
posited as a One , and that its essence is to express itself as an
‘other 5 which approaches it externally. Force is rather itself this
universal medium in which the moments subsist as ‘matters’;
or, in other words, Force has expressed itself and what was sup¬
posed to be something else soliciting it is really Force itself. It
exists, therefore, now as the medium of the unfolded ‘matters 5 .
But equally essentially it has the form of the supersession of the
subsisting ‘matters 5 , or is essentially a One. Consequently, this
oneness , since Force is posited as the medium of the ‘matters’,
is now something other than Force, which has this its essence out¬
side of it. But, since Force must of necessity be this oneness
which it is not as yet posited as being, this ‘other 5 approaches it ,
soliciting it to reflect itself into itself: in other words, Force
supersedes its expression. But in fact Force is itself this reflected-
ness-into-self, or this supersession of the expression. The one¬
ness, in the form in which it appeared, viz. as an ‘other 5 ,
vanishes; Force is this ‘other 5 itself, is Force that is driven back
into itself.

138. What appears as an ‘other’ and solicits Force, both to
expression and to a return into itself, directly proves to be itself
Force ; for the ‘other 5 shows itself to be as much a universal
medium as a One, and in such a way that each of these forms
at the same time appears only as a vanishing moment. Con¬
sequently, Force, in that there is an ‘other 5 for it, and it is for


A. CONSCIOUSNESS


84

an ‘other’, has not yet altogether emerged from its Notion.
There are at the same time two Forces present; the Notion of
both is no doubt the same, but it has gone forth from its unity
into a duality. Instead of the antithesis remaining entirely and
essentially only a moment, it seems, by its self-diremption into
two wholly independent forces, to have withdrawn from the con¬
trolling unity. We have now to see more closely the implications
of this independence.

In the first place, the second Force appears as the one that
solicits and, moreover, in accordance with its content, as the
universal medium in relation to the Force characterized as the
one solicited. But since the second Force is essentially an
alternation of these two moments and is itself Force, it is likewise
the universal medium only through its being solicited to be such ; and
similarly, too, it is a negative unity, i.e. it solicits the retraction
of Force [into itself], only through its being solicited to do so. Con¬
sequently, this distinction, too, which obtained between the two
Forces, one of which was supposed to be the soliciting, the other
the solicited, Force is transformed into the same reciprocal
interchange of the determinatenesses.

139. The interplay of the two Forces thus consists in their
being determined as mutually opposed, in their being for one
another in this determination, and in the absolute, immediate
alternation of the determinations—consists, i.e. in a transition
through which alone these determinations are in which the
Forces seem to make an independent appearance. The soliciting
Force, e.g., is posited as a universal medium, and the one soli¬
cited, on the other hand, as Force driven back into itself; but
the former is a universal medium only through the other being
Force that is driven back into itself; or, it is really the latter that
is the soliciting Force for the other and is what makes it a
medium. The first Force has its determinateness only through
the other, and solicits only in so far as the other solicits it to
be a soliciting Force; and, just as directly, it loses the deter¬
minateness given to it, for this passes over—or rather has
already passed over—to the other. The external, soliciting
Force appears as a universal medium, but only through its hav¬
ing been solicited by the other Force to do so; but this means
that the latter gives it that character and is really itself essentially
a universal medium; it gives the soliciting Force this character





FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING 85

just because this other determination is essential to it, i.e.
because this is really its own self.

140. To complete our insight into the Notion of this move¬
ment it may further be noticed that the differences themselves
are exhibited in a twofold difference: once as a difference of
content, one extreme being the Force reflected into itself, but the
other the medium of the ‘matters’; and again as a difference
of form, since one solicits and the other is solicited, the former
being active and the other passive. According to the difference
of content they are distinguished [merely] in principle, or for
us; but according to the difference of form they are independent
and in their relation keep themselves separate and opposed to
one another. The fact that the extremes, from the standpoint
of both these sides, are thus nothing in themselves , that these sides
in which their different essences were supposed to consist are
only vanishing moments, are an immediate transition of each
into its opposite, this truth becomes apparent to consciousness
in its perception of the movement of Force. But for us, as
remarked above, something more was apparent, viz. that the
differences, qua differences of content and form, vanished in them¬
selves; and on the side of form, the essence of the active, soliciting
or independent side, was the same as that which, on the side of
content, presented itself as Force driven back into itself; the
side which was passive, which was solicited or for an other, was,
from the side of form, the same as that which, from the side
of content, presented itself as the universal medium of the many
‘matters’.

141. From this we see that the Notion of Force becomes actual
through its duplication into two Forces, and how it comes to
be so. These two Forces exist as independent essences; but their
existence is a movement of each towards the other, such that
their being is rather a pure positedness or a being that is posited
by an other, i.e. their being has really the significance of a sheer
vanishing. They do not exist as extremes which retain for them¬
selves something fixed and substantial, transmitting to one
another in their middle term and in their contact a merely
external property; on the contrary, what they are, they are,
only in this middle term and in this contact. In this, there is
immediately present both the repression within itself of Force,
or its being-for-self, as well as its expression: Force that solicits


86


A. CONSCIOUSNESS


and Force that is solicited. Consequently, these moments are
not divided into two independent extremes offering each other
only an opposite extreme: their essence rather consists simply
and solely in this, that each is solely through the other, and
what each thus is it immediately no longer is, since it is the
other. They have thus, in fact, no substances of their own which
might support and maintain them. The Notion of Force rather
preserves itself as the essence in its very actuality ; Force, as actual ,
exists simply and solely in its expression , which at the same time
is nothing else than a supersession of itself. This actual Force,
when thought of as free from its expression and as being for
itself, is Force driven back into itself; but in fact this deter¬
minateness, as we have found, is itself only a moment of Force’s
expression. Thus the truth of Force remains only the thought of
it; the moments of its actuality, their substances and their move¬
ment, collapse unresistingly into an undifferentiated unity, a
unity which is not Force driven back into itself (for this is itself
only such a moment), but is its Notion qua Notion. Thus the real¬
ization of Force is at the same time the loss of reality; in that
realization it has really become something quite different, viz.
this universality , which the Understanding knows at the outset,
or immediately, to be its essence and which also proves itself
to be such in the supposed reality of Force, in the actual sub¬
stances.

142. In so far as we regard the first universal as the Under¬
standing’s Notion in which Force is not yet for itself the second
is now Force’s essence as it exhibits itself in and for itself. Or,
conversely, if we regard the first universal as the Immediate ,
which was supposed to be an actual object for consciousness, then
this second is determined as the negative of Force that is objective
to sense; it is Force in the form of its true essence in which it
exists only as an object for the Understanding. The first universal
would be Force driven back into itself, or Force as Substance;
the second, however, is the inner being of things qua inner, which
is the same as the Notion of Force qua Notion.

143. This true essence of Things has now the character of
not being immediately for consciousness; on the contrary, con¬
sciousness has a mediated relation to the inner being and, as
the Understanding, looks through this mediating play of Forces into
the true background of Things. The middle term which unites the






FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING 87

two extremes, the Understanding and the inner world, is the
developed being of Force which, for the Understanding itself
is henceforth only a vanishing. This ‘being’ is therefore called
appearance ; for we call being that is directly and in its own self
a non-being a surface show. But it is not merely a surface show •
it is appearance, a totality of show. This totality, as totality or
as a universal, is what constitutes the inner [of Thingsl, the play
of Forces as a reflection of the inner into itself. In it, the Things
of perception are expressly present for consciousness as they are
in themselves, viz. as moments which immediately and without
rest or stay turn into their opposite, the One immediately into
the universal, the essential immediately into the unessential
and vice versa. This play of Forces is consequently the de¬
veloped negative; but its truth is the positive, viz. the universal,
the object that, in itself, possesses being. The being of this object
for consciousness is mediated by the movement of appearance
in which the being of perception and the sensuously objective in
general has a merely negative significance. Consciousness,

ere ore, reflects itself out of this movement back into itself as
ie 1rue; but, qua consciousness, converts this truth again into
an objective inner, and distinguishes this reflection of Things
from its own reflection into itself: just as the movement of
mediation is likewise still objective for it. This inner is, there-
ore, or consciousness an extreme over against it; but it is for
consciousness the True, since in the inner, as the in-itself, it pos-
sesses at the same time the certainty of itself, or the moment
o its being-for-self. But it is not yet conscious of this ground
or basis, for the being-for-self which the inner was supposed to
possess in its own self would be nothing else but the negative
movement. This, however, is for consciousness still the objective
vanishing appearance, not yet its own being-for-self. Con¬
sequently, the inner is for it certainly Notion, but it does not
as yet know the nature of the Notion.

144. Within this inner truth, as the absolute universal which has
been purged ol the antithesis between the universal and the in¬
dividual and has become the object of the Understanding, there
now opens up above the sensuous world, which is the world of
appearance a supersensible world which henceforth is the true
world, above the vanishing present world there opens up a
permanent beyond ; an in-itself which is the first, and therefore


88 A. CONSCIOUSNESS

imperfect, appearance of Reason, or only the pure element in
which the truth has its essence .

145. Our object is thus from now on the syllogism which has
for its extremes the inner being of Things and the Understand¬
ing, and for its middle term, appearance; but the movement
of this syllogism yields the further determination of what the
Understanding descries in this inner world through the middle
term, and the experience from which Understanding learns
about the close-linked unity of these terms.

146. The inner world is, for consciousness, still a pure beyond ,
because consciousness does not as yet find itself in it. It is empty ,
for it is merely the nothingness of appearance, and positively
the simple or unitary universal. This mode of the inner being
[of Things] finds ready acceptance by those who say that the
inner being of Things is unknowable; but another reason for
this would have to be given. Certainly, we have no knowledge
of this inner world as it is here in its immediacy; bu t not because
Reason is too short-sighted or is limited, or however else one
likes to call it—on this point, we know nothing as yet because
we have not yet gone deep enough—but because of the simple
nature of the matter in hand, that is to say, because in the void
nothing is known, or, expressed from the other side, just because
this inner world is determined as the beyond of consciousness.
The result is, of course the same if a blind man is placed amid
the wealth of the supersensible world (if it has such wealth,
whether it be its own peculiar content, or whether consciousness
itself be this content), and if one with sight is placed in pure
darkness, or if you like, in pure light, just supposing the super¬
sensible world to be this. The man with sight sees as little in
that pure light as in pure darkness, and just as much as the
blind man, in the abundant wealth which lies before him. If
no further significance attached to the inner world and to our
close link with it through the world of appearance, then nothing
would be left to us but to stop at the world of appearance, i.e.
to perceive something as true which we know is not true. Or,
in order that there may yet be something in the void—which,
though it first came about as devoid of objective Things must,
however, as empty in itself\ be taken as also void of aii spiritual
relationships and distinctions of consciousness qua conscious¬
ness—in order, then, that in this complete void> which is even






8 9


FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING

called the holy of holies , there may yet be something, we must
fill it up with reveries, appearances , produced by consciousness
itself. It would have to be content with being treated so badly
for it would not deserve anything better, since even reveries are
better than its own emptiness.

147. The inner world, or supersensible beyond, has, how¬
ever, come into being: it comes from the world of appearance which
has mediated it; in other words, appearance is its essence and,
in fact, its filling. The supersensible is the sensuous and the per¬
ceived posited as it is in truth \ but the truth of the sensuous and
the perceived is to be appearance. The supersensible is therefore
appearance qua appearance. We completely misunderstand this if
we think that the supersensible world is therefore the sensuous
world, or the world as it exists for immediate sense-certainty
and perception; for the world of appearance is, on the contrary,
not the world of sense-knowledge and perception as a world
that positively is, but this world posited as superseded, or as
in truth an inner world. It is often said that the supersensible
world is not appearance; but what is here understood by appear¬
ance is not appearance, but rather the sensuous world as itself
the really actual.

148. The Understanding, which is our object, finds itself in
just this position, that the inner world has come into being for
it, to begin with, only as the universal, still unfilled, in-itself
The play of Forces has merely this negative significance of being
in itself nothing, and its only positive significance that of being
the mediating agency , but outside of the Understanding. The con¬
nection of the Understanding with the inner world through the
mediation is, however, its own movement through which the
inner world will fill itself out for the Understanding. What is
immediate for the Understanding is the play of Forces; but what
is the True for it, is the simple inner world. The movement of
Force is therefore the True, likewise only as something alto¬
gether simple. We have seen, however, that this play of Forces
is so constituted that the Force which is solicited by another
Force is equally the soliciting Force for that other, which only
thereby becomes itself a soliciting Force. What is present in this
interplay is likewise merely the immediate alternation, or the
absolute interchange, of the determinateness which constitutes the
sole content of what appears: to be either a universal medium,


9 °


A. CONSCIOUSNESS


or a negative unity. It ceases immediately on its appearance
in determinate form to be what it was on appearing; by appear¬
ing in determinate form, it solicits the other side to express itself,
i.e. the latter is now immediately what the first was supposed
to be. Each of these two sides, the relation of soliciting and the
relation of the opposed determinate content, is on its own account
an absolute reversal and interchange [of the determinateness].
But these two relations themselves are again one and the same;
and the difference of form , of being the solicited and the solicit¬
ing Force, is the same as the difference of content , of being the
solicited Force as such, viz. the passive medium on the one
hand, and the soliciting Force, the active, negative unity or the
One, on the other. In this way there vanishes completely all
distinction of separate , mutually contrasted Forces which were
supposed to be present in this movement, for they rested solely
on those distinctions; and the distinction between the Forces,
along with both those distinctions, likewise collapses into only
one. Thus there is neither Force, nor the act of soliciting or
being solicited, nor the determinateness of being a stable
medium and a unity reflected into itself, there is neither some¬
thing existing singly by itself, nor are there diverse antitheses;
on the contrary, what there is in this absolute flux is only dif¬
ference as a universal difference, or as a difference into which the
many antitheses have been resolved. This difference, as a uni¬
versal difference, is consequently the simple element in the play of
Force itself and what is true in it. It is the law of Force .

149. The absolute flux of appearance becomes a simple dif¬
ference through its relation to the simplicity of the inner world
or of the Understanding. The inner being is, to begin with, only
implicitly the universal; but this implicit, simple universal is
essentially no less absolutely universal difference , for it is the out¬
come of the flux itself, or the flux is its essence; but it is a flux
that is posited in the inner world as it is in truth, and consequently
it is received in that inner world as equally an absolute univer¬
sal difference that is absolutely at rest and remains selfsame. In
other words, negation is an essential moment of the universal,
and negation, or mediation in the universal, is therefore a uni¬
versal difference. This difference is expressed in the law , which
is the stable image of unstable appearance. Consequently, the
supersensible world is an inert realm of laws which, though beyond






FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING gi

the perceived world—for this exhibits law only through incess¬
ant change—is equally present in it and is its direct tranquil
image.

150. This realm of laws is indeed the truth for the Under¬
standing, and that truth has its content in the law. At the same
time, however, this realm is only the initial truth for the Under¬
standing and does not fill out the world of appearance. In this
the law is present, but is not the entire presence of appearance;
with every change of circumstance the law has a different actu¬
ality. Thus appearance retains/or itself an aspect which is not
in the inner world; i.e. appearance is not yet truly posited as
appearance, as a superseded being-for-self. This defect in the law
must equally be made manifest in the law itself. What seems
to be defective in it is that while it does contain difference, the
difference is universal, indeterminate. However, in so far as it
is not law in general, but a law, it does contain determinateness';
consequently, there are indefinitely many laws. But this plurality
is itself rather a defect; for it contradicts the principle of the
Understanding for which, as consciousness of the simple inner
world, the True is the implicitly universal unity. It must there¬
fore let the many laws collapse into one law, just as, e.g., the
law by which a stone falls, and the law by which the heavenly
bodies move, have been grasped as one law. But when the laws
thus coincide, they lose their specific character. The law
becomes more and more superficial, and as a result what is
found is, in fact, not the unity of these specific laws, but a law
which leaves out their specific character; just as the one law
which combines in itself the laws of falling terrestrial bodies and
of the motions of the heavenly bodies, in fact expresses neither
law. The unification of all laws in universal attraction expresses
no other content than just the mere Notion of law itself which
is posited in that law in the form of being. Universal attraction
merely asserts that everything has a constant difference in relation to
other things. The Understanding imagines that in this unifica¬
tion it has found a universal law which expresses universal
reality as suck; but in fact it has only found the Notion of law
itself although in such a way that what it is saying is that all
reality is in its own self, conformable to law. The expression, uni¬
versal attraction, is of great importance in so far as it is directed
against the thoughtless way in which everything is pictured as


92 A. CONSCIOUSNESS

contingent, and for which determinateness has the form of sen-
suous independence.

151. Thus, in contrast to specific laws, we have universal
attraction, or the pure Notion of law. In so far as this pure
Notion is looked on as the essence, or the true inner being, the
determinateness of the specific law itself still belongs to appear¬
ance, or rather to sensuous being. But the pure Notion of law
transcends not merely the law which, being itself a specific law,
stands contrasted with other specific laws, but also transcends
law as such. The determinateness of which we spoke is itself
really only a vanishing moment which can no longer occur here
as something essential, for here it is only the law that is the True,
but the Notion of law is turned against law itself. That is to say,
in the law the difference itself is grasped immediately and taken
up into the universal, thereby, however, giving the moments
whose relation is expressed by the law a subsistence in the form
of indifferent and [merely] implicit essentialities. But these
parts of the difference present in the law are at the same time
themselves determinate sides ; the pure Notion of law as uni¬
versal attraction must, to get its true meaning, be grasped in
such a way that in it, as what is absolutely simple or unitary,
the differences present in law as such themselves return again
into the inner world as a simple unity. This unity is the inner necessity
of the law.

152. The law is thereby present in a twofold manner: once, as
law in which the differences are expressed as independent mom¬
ents; and also in the form of a simple withdrawal into itself which
again can be called Force , but in the sense not of a Force that is
driven back intoitself, but Force as such, or the Notion of Force, an
abstraction which absorbs the differences themselves of what
attracts and what is attracted. In this sense, simple electricity,
e.g., is Force ; but the expression of difference falls within the
law ; this difference is positive and negative electricity. In the
case of the motion of falling, Force is the simple factor, gravity ,
whose law is that the magnitudes of the different moments of
the motion, the time elapsed and the space traversed, are related
to one another as root and square. Electricity itself is not dif¬
ference perse , or is not in its essence the dual essence of positive
and negative electricity; hence, it is usually said that it has the
law of this mode of being, and, too, that it has the property of






FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING


93


expressing itself in this way. It is true that this property is the
essential and sole property of this Force, or that it belongs to
it necessarily. But necessity here is an empty word; Force must,
just because it must, duplicate itself in this way. Of course, given
positive electricity, negative too is given in principle ; for the posi¬
tive is, only as related to a negative, or, the positive is in its
own self the difference from itself; and similarly with the nega¬
tive. But that electricity as such should divide itself in this way
is not in itself a necessity. Electricity, as simple Force, is indifferent
to its law— to be positive and negative; and if we call the former
its Notion but the latter its being, then its Notion is indifferent
to its being. It merely has this property, which just means that
this property is not in itself necessary to it. This indifference is
given another form when it is said that to be positive and nega¬
tive belongs to the definition of electricity, and that this is simply
its Notion and essence. In that case, its being would simply mean
its actual existence. But that definition does not contain the
necessity of its existence ; it exists, either because we find it, i.e. its
existence is not necessary at all, or else it exists through, or by
means of, other Forces, i.e. its necessity is an external necessity.
But, in basing this necessity on the determinateness of being
through another, we relapse again into the plurality of specific laws
which we have just left behind in order to consider law as law.
It is only with law as law that we are to compare its Notion
as Notion, or its necessity. But in all these forms, necessity has
shown itself to be only an empty word.

153. There is still another form than that just indicated in
which the indifference of law and Force, or of Notion and being,
is to be found. In the law of motion, e.g., it is necessary that
motion be split up into time and space, or again, into distance
and velocity. Thus, since motion is only the relation of these
factors, it—the universal—is certainly divided in its own self. But
now these parts, time and space, or distance and velocity, do
not in themselves express this origin in a One; they are in¬
different to one another, space is thought of as able to be with¬
out time, time without space, and distance at least without
velocity—just as their magnitudes are indifferent to one
another, since they are not related to one another as positive and
negative, and thus are not related to one another through their
own essential nature. The necessity of the division is thus certainly


94


A. CONSCIOUSNESS


present here, but not the necessity of the parts as such for one
another. But it is just for this reason that that first necessity,
too, is itself only a sham, false necessity. For motion is not itself
thought of as something simple , or as a pure essence, but as
already divided; time and space are in themselves its independent
parts or essences, or, distance and velocity are modes of being
or ways of thinking, either of which can well be without the
other; and motion is, therefore, only their superficial relation,
not their essence. If it is thought of as a simple essence or as
Force, motion is no doubt gravity, but this does not contain these
differences at all.

154. The difference, then, in both cases is not a difference
in its own self : either the universal, Force, is indifferent to the
division which is the law, or the differences, the parts, of the
law are indifferent to one another. The Understanding, how¬
ever, has the Notion of this implicit difference just because the law
is, on the one hand, the inner, implicit being, but is, at the same
time, inwardly differentiated. That this difference is thus an
inner difference follows from the fact that the law is a simple Force
or is the Notion of the difference, and is therefore a difference
belonging to the Notion. But this inner difference still falls, to
begin with, only within the Understanding, and is not yet
posited in the thing itself. It is, therefore, only its own necessity
that is asserted by the Understanding; the difference, then, is
posited by the Understanding in such a way that, at the same
time, it is expressly stated that the difference is not a difference
belonging to the thing itself This necessity, which is merely verbal,
is thus a recital of the moments constituting the cycle of the
necessity. The moments are indeed distinguished, but, at the
same time, their difference is expressly said to be not a difference
of the thing itself, and consequently is itself immediately can¬
celled again. This process is called ‘ explanation \ A law is enunci¬
ated; from this, its implicitly universal element or ground is
distinguished as Force ; but it is said that this difference is no
difference, rather that the ground is constituted exactly the
same as the law. The single occurrence of lightning, e.g., is
apprehended as a universal, and this universal is enunciated
as the law of electricity; the ‘explanation’ then condenses the
law into Force as the essence of the law. This Force, then, is so
constituted that when it is expressed, opposite electricities appear,







FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING


95


which disappear again into one another; that is, Force is con¬
stituted exactly the same as law ; there is said to be no difference
whatever between them. The differences are the pure, universal
expression of law, and pure Force; but both have the same con¬
tent, the same constitution. Thus the difference qua difference
of content, of the thing, is also again withdrawn.

155. In this tautological movement, the Understanding, as
we have seen, sticks to the inert unity of its object, and the move¬
ment falls only within the Understanding itself, not within the
object. It is an explanation that not only explains nothing, but
is so plain that, while it pretends to say something different from
what has already been said, really says nothing at all but only
repeats the same thing. In the Thing itself this movement gives
rise to nothing new; it comes into consideration [only] as a
movement of the Understanding. In it, however, we detect the
very thing that was missing in the law, viz. the absolute flux
itself; for this movement , when we look at it more closely, is
directly the opposite of itself. That is to say, it posits a difference
which is not only not a difference for us, but one which the move¬
ment itself cancels as a difference. This is the same flux which
presented itself as the play of Forces. This contained the dis¬
tinction of soliciting and solicited Force, or Force expressing
itself and Force repressed into itself; but these were distinctions
which in reality were no distinctions, and therefore were also
immediately cancelled again. What is present here is not merely
bare unity in which no difference would be posited , but rather a
movement in which a distinction is certainly made but , because it is
no distinction, is again cancelled. In the process, then, of explain¬
ing, the to and fro of change which before was outside of
the inner world and present only in the appearance, has pene¬
trated into the supersensible world itself. Our consciousness,
however, has passed over from the inner being as object to the
other side, into the Understanding , and it experiences change
there.

156. Thus this change is not yet a change of the thing itself,
but rather presents itself as pure change by the very fact that
the content of the moments of change remains the same. But since
the Notion , qua Notion of the Understanding, is the same as the
inner being of things, this change becomes for the Understanding
the law of the inner world. The Understanding thus learns that


96


A. CONSCIOUSNESS


it is a law of appearance itself, that differences arise whi C L
no differences, or that what is selfsame repels itself from j f a *" e
and similarly, that the differences are only such as are in re Se jf;
no differences and which cancel themselves; in other Wq
what is not selfsame is self-attractive. And thus we have a Sec r ^s,
law whose content is the opposite of what was previously c
law, viz. difference which remains constantly selfsame; for 7^
new law expresses rather that like becomes unlike and .


, viz. difference which remains constantly selfsame; f Qr *«<:
new law expresses rather that like becomes unlike and u *!} is
becomes like. The Notion demands of the thoughtless thinh^ e
that he bring both laws together and become aware of t ^ ker
antithesis. The second is certainly also a law, an inner s , r
identical being, but a selfsameness rather of the unlike, a n C
manence of impermanence. In the play of Forces this i
showed itself to be precisely this absolute transition and n ,
change; the selfsame, viz. Force, splits into an antithesis
at firs, appears to be an independent difference, but which ' h

itself and rh° T' 1 ? “ “ thc which repels itself f^

dse f and therefore wha, is repelled is essentially self-a„r act

the efo e 1"“’, d '5 erence crea '«i. since it is no differed' 1
exhibt irselffd-ff f again ' Consequently, the differ,';

and ,h ' refor '

the tranquil kintrrIn 1S P r*, nC ’ ple ’ the first supersensible world

ceived zh k 7iz:"r - ,he ^ ° f ,he

pneral, like its differences Th!,‘V 1 !? 0 ” 1 '' The ' aW was . in
however, it is nositeH th , ’ Whlch remains selfsame; now

opposite of itseff The self ° f the tWO wor,ds is reall y the

w hat is not selfsame reallv™ re P e,s itselffrom ,tself . and
f act, it is only when thus H f'° SItS ltself as selfsame. In point of
difference, or the different rm,ned that the difference is i nner

Itself, and the unlike, like itself ^ ^ b ?," g Un,ike

| n th ts way the inverted world ™is second supersensible world i s

ts already present in the firs s ^ moreover > sinc ? ° ne asp ect
°f the first. With this th • 1 supersen sible world, the inversion
ance - For the first superset W ° r,d is com P ,eted as a PPear-

faisingofthe perceived world b C W ? r,d was only the imTned m e

J ts necessary counter™^ • ° the univ ersal element; it had

ln this perceived world which still


FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING


97


retained for itself the principle of change and alteration . The first
kingdom of laws lacked that principle, but obtains it as an in¬
verted world.

158. According, then, to the law of this inverted world, what
is like in the first world is unlike to itself, and what is unlike in
the first world is equally unlike to itself \ or it becomes like itself.
Expressed in determinate moments, this means that what in
the law of the first world is sweet, in this inverted in-itself is
sour, what in the former is black is, in the other, white. What
in the law of the first is the north pole of the magnet is, in its
other, supersensible in-itself [viz. in the earth], the south pole;
but what is there south pole is here north pole. Similarly, what
in the first law is the oxygen pole of electricity becomes in its
other, supersensible essence, hydrogen pole; and conversely,
what is there the hydrogen pole becomes here the oxygen pole.
In another sphere, revenge on an enemy is, according to the
immediate law , the supreme satisfaction of the injured individu¬
ality. This law, however, which bids me confront him as him¬
self a person who does not treat me as such, and in fact bids
me destroy him as an individuality—this law is turned round by
the principle of the other world into its opposite: the reinstate¬
ment of myself as a person through the destruction of the alien
individuality is turned into self-destruction. If, now, this in¬
version, which finds expression in the punishment of crime, is
made into a law , it, too, again is only the law of one world which
is confronted by an inverted supersensible world where what is
despised in the former is honoured, and what in the former is
honoured, meets with contempt. The punishment which under
the law of the first world disgraces and destroys a man, is trans¬
formed in its inverted world into the pardon which preserves his
essential being and brings him to honour.

159. Looked at superficially, this inverted world is the oppo¬
site of the first in the sense that it has the latter outside of it
and repels that world from itself as an inverted actual world : that
the one is appearance, but the other the in-itself; that the one
is the world as it is for an other, whereas the other is the world
as it is for itself. So that to use the previous examples, what
tastes sweet is really, or inwardly in the thing, sour; or what is
north pole in the actual magnet in the world of appearance,
would be south pole in the inner or essential being ; what presents


A. CONSCIOUSNESS


98

itself as oxygen pole in the phenomenon of electricity would
be hydrogen pole in unmanifested electricity. Or, an action
which in the world of appearance is a crime would, in the inner
world, be capable of being really good (a bad action may be
well-intentioned); punishment is punishment only in the world
of appearance ; in itself or in another world, it may be a benefit
for the criminal. But such antitheses of inner and outer, of
appearance and the supersensible, as of two different kinds of
actuality, we no longer find here. The repelled differences are
not shared afresh between two substances such as would support
them and lend them a separate subsistence: this would result
in the Understanding withdrawing from the inner world and
relapsing into its previous position. The one side, or substance,
would be the world of perception again in which one of the
two laws would be operative, and confronting it would be an
inner world, just such a sense-world as the first, but in the imagina¬
tion ; it could not be exhibited as a sense-world, could not be
seen, heard, or tasted, and yet it would be thought of as such
a sense-world. But, in fact, if the one posited world is a perceived
world, and its in-itself as its inversion, is equally thought of as
sensuous , then sourness which would be the in-itself of the sweet
thing is actually a thing just as much as the latter, viz. a sour
thing] black, which would be the in-itself of white, is an actual
black; the north pole which is the in-itself of the south pole is
the north pole actually present in the same magnet] the oxygen pole
which is the in-itself of the hydrogen pole is actually present in
the same voltaic pile. The actual crime, however, has its inversion
and its in-itself as possibility , in the intention as such, but not in
a good intention; for the truth of intention is only the act itself.

ut the crime, as regards its content, has its reflection-into-self,
or its inversion, in the actual punishment; this is the reconcilia¬
tion of the law with the actuality opposed to it in the crime.
Finally, the actual punishment has its inverted actuality present
in it in such a way that the punishment is an actualization of
the law, whereby the activity exercised by the law as punish¬
ment suspends itself and, from being active, the law becomes
again quiescent and is vindicated, and the conflict of individu-
a ity with it, and of it with individuality, is extinguished.

160. From the idea, then, of inversion, which constitutes the
essential nature of one aspect of-the supersensible world, we




FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING


99


must eliminate the sensuous idea of fixing the differences in a
different sustaining element; and this absolute Notion of the dif¬
ference must be represented and understood purely as inner dif¬
ference, a repulsion of the selfsame, as selfsame, from itself, and
likeness of the unlike as unlike. We have to think pure change,
or think antithesis within the antithesis itself \ or contradiction. For in
the difference which is an inner difference, the opposite is not
merely one of two —if it were, it would simply be , without being
an opposite—but it is the opposite of an opposite, or the other
is itself immediately present in it. Certainly, I put the ‘opposite’
here, and the ‘other’ of which it is the opposite, there; the ‘oppo¬
site’, then, is on one side, is in and for itself without the ‘other’.
Butjust because I have the ‘opposite’ here in and for itself, it is the
opposite of itself, or it has, in fact, the ‘other’ immediately
present in it. Thus the supersensible world, which is the inverted
world, has at the same time overarched the other world and
has it within it; it is for itself the inverted world, i.e. the inversion
of itself; it is itself and its opposite in one unity. Only thus is
it difference as inner difference, or difference in its own self or
difference as an infinity.

161. We see that through infinity, law completes itself into
an immanent necessity, and all the moments of [the world of]
appearance are taken up into the inner world. That the simple
character of law is infinity means, according to what we have
found, (a) that it is self -identical, but is also in itself different ; or it
is the selfsame which repels itself from itself or sunders itself into
two. What was called simple Force duplicates itself and through
its infinity is law. (b) What is thus dirempted, which constitutes
the parts thought of as in the law, exhibits itself as a stable exist¬
ence; and if the parts are considered without the Notion of the
inner difference, then space and time, or distance and velocity,
which appear as moments of gravity, are just as indifferent and
without a necessary relation to one another as to gravity itself,
or, as this simple gravity is indifferent to them, or, again, as
simple electricity is indifferent to positive and negative elec¬
tricity. But (c) through the Notion of inner difference, these
unlike and indifferent moments, space and time, etc. are a dif¬
ference which is no difference , or only a difference of what is self¬
same , and its essence is unity. As positive and negative they
stimulate each other into activity, and their being is rather to



I00 A. CONSCIOUSNESS

posit themselves as not-being and to suspend themselves in the
unity. The two distinguished moments both subsist; they are
implicit and are opposites in themselves , i.e. each is the opposite
of itself; each has its ‘other’ within it and they are only one

unity. .

162. This simple infinity, or the absolute Notion, may be

called the simple essence of life, the soul of the world, the uni¬
versal blood, whose omnipresence is neither disturbed nor inter¬
rupted by any difference, but rather is itself every difference,
as also their supersession; it pulsates within itself but does not
move, inwardly vibrates, yet is at rest. It is sel (-identical, for the
differences are tautological; they are differences that are none.
This self-identical essence is therefore related only to itself; ‘to
itself implies relationship to an ‘other’, and the relation-to-self
is rather & self-sundering', or, in other words, that very self-identi-
calness is an inner difference. These sundered moments are thus
in and for themselves each an opposite— of an other ; thus in each
moment the ‘other’ is at the same time expressed; or each is
not the opposite of an ‘other’ but only a pure opposite ; and so
each is therefore in its own self the opposite of itself. In other
words, it is not an opposite at all, but is purely for itself, a pure,
self-identical essence that has no difference in it. Accordingly,
we do not need to ask the question, still less to think that fretting
over such a question is philosophy, or even that it is a question
philosophy cannot answer, the question, viz. ‘ How , from this
pure essence, how does difference or otherness issue forth from
it?’ For the division into two moments has already taken place,
difference is excluded from the self-identical and set apart from
it. What was supposed to be the self-identical is thus already one
of these two moments instead of being the absolute essence.
That the self-identical divides itself into two means, therefore,
just as well that it supersedes itself as already divided, supersedes
itself as an otherness. The unity , of which it is usual to say that
difference cannot issue from it, is in fact itself one of the two
moments; it is the abstraction of the simplicity or unitary nature
over against the difference. But in saying that the unity is an
abstraction, that is, is only one of the opposed moments, it is
already implied that it is the dividing of itself; for if the unity
is a negative , is opposed to something, then it is eo ipso posited as
that which has an antithesis within it. The different moments




FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING


IOI


of self-sundering and of becoming self-identical are therefore likewise
only this movement of self-supersession \ for since the self-identi¬
cal, which is supposed first to sunder itself or become its oppo¬
site, is an abstraction or is already itself a sundered moment, its
self-sundering is therefore a supersession of what it is, and there¬
fore the supersession of its dividedness. Its becoming self-identical
is equally a self-sundering; what becomes identical with itself
thereby opposes itself to its self-sundering; i.e. it thereby puts
itself on one side, or rather it becomes a sundered moment.

163. Infinity, or this absolute unrest of pure self-movement,
in which whatever is determined in one way or another, e.g.
as being, is rather the opposite of this determinateness, this no
doubt has been from the start the soul of all that has gone
before; but it is in the inner world that it has first freely and
clearly shown itself. Appearance, or the play of Forces, already
displays it, but it is as ‘ explanation ’ that it first freely stands forth;
and in being finally an object for consciousness, as that which
it is , consciousness is thus self-consciousness. The Understanding’s
‘explanation’ is primarily only the description of what self-con¬
sciousness is. It supersedes the differences present in the law,
differences which have already become pure differences but are
still indifferent, and posits them in a single unity, in Force. But
this unifying of them is equally and immediately a sundering,
for it supersedes the differences and posits the oneness of Force
only by creating a new difference, that of Law and Force,
which, however, at the same time is no difference; and, more¬
over, from the fact that this difference is no difference, it goes
on to supersede this difference again, since it lets Force be simi¬
larly constituted to Law. But this movement, or necessity, is
thus still a necessity and a movement of the Understanding,
or, the movement as such is not the Understanding’s object ; on
the contrary, in this movement the Understanding has as
objects positive and negative electricity, distance, force of
attraction, and a thousand other things which constitute the
content of the moments of the movement. The reason why
‘explaining’ affords so much self-satisfaction is just because in
it consciousness is, so to speak, communing directly with itself,
enjoying only itself; although it seems to be busy with some¬
thing else, it is in fact occupied only with itself.

164. In the contrary law, as the inversion of the first law,



iq2 A CONSCIOUSNESS

or in the inner difference, it is true that infinity itself becomes
the object of the Understanding; but once again the Under¬
standing falls short of infinity as such, since it again apportions
to two worlds, or to two substantial elements, that which is a
difference in itself—the self-repulsion of the selfsame and the
self-attraction of the unlike. To the Understanding, the move¬
ment , as it is found in experience, is here a [mere] happening,
and the selfsame and the unlike are predicates , whose essence is
an inert substrate. What is, for the Understanding, an object
in a sensuous covering, is for us in its essential form as a pure
Notion. This apprehension of the difference as it is in truth , or
the apprehension of infinity as such, is for us , or in itself [ i.e. is
merely implicit]. The exposition of its Notion belongs to
Science; but consciousness, in the way that it immediately has
this Notion, again comes on the scene as a form belonging to
consciousness itself, or as a new shape of consciousness, which
does not recognize in what has gone before its own essence, but
looks on it as something quite different. Since this Notion of
infinity is an object for consciousness, the latter is consciousness
ofa difference that is no less immediately cancelled; consciousness
is for its own self, it is a distinguishing of that which contains
no difference, or self-consciousness. I distinguish myself from
myself, and in doing so I am directly aware that what is distin¬
guished from myself is not different [from me]. I, the selfsame
being, repel myself from myself; but what is posited as distinct
from me, or as unlike me, is immediately, in being so distin¬
guished, not a distinction for me. It is true that consciousness
of an ‘other’, of an object in general, is itself necessarily self-
consciousness, a reflectedness-into-self, consciousness of itself in
its otherness. The necessary advance from the previous shapes of
consciousness for which their truth was a Thing, an ‘other’ than
themselves, expresses just this, that not only is consciousness of
a thing possible only for a self-consciousness, but that self-con¬
sciousness alone is the truth of those shapes. But it is only for
us that this truth exists, not yet for consciousness. But self-con¬
sciousness has at first become [simply]/or itself not yet as a unity
with consciousness in general.

165. We see that in the inner world of appearance, the Under¬
standing in truth comes to know nothing else but appearance,
but not in the shape of a play of Forces, but rather that play





FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING I03

of Forces in its absolutely universal moments and in their move¬
ment; in fact, the Understanding experiences only itself. Raised
above perception, consciousness exhibits itself closed in a unity
with the supersensible world through the mediating term of
appearance, through which it gazes into this background [lying
behind appearance]. The two extremes [of this syllogism], the
one, of the pure inner world, the other, that of the inner being
gazing into this pure inner world, have now coincided, and just
as they, qua extremes, have vanished, so too the middle term,
as something other than these extremes, has also vanished. This
curtain [of appearance] hanging before the inner world is there¬
fore drawn away; and we have the inner being [the ‘I’] gazing
into the inner world—the vision of the undifferentiated selfsame
being, which repels itself from itself, posits itself as an inner
being containing different moments, but for which equally
these moments are immediately not dxffzrtnt-^self-consciousness.
It is manifest that behind the so-called curtain which is sup¬
posed to conceal the inner world, there is nothing to be seen
unless we go behind it ourselves, as much in order that we may
see, as that there may be something behind there which can be
seen. But at the same time it is evident that we cannot without
more ado go straightway behind appearance. For this know¬
ledge ofwhat is the truth of appearance as ordinarily conceived,
and of its inner being, is itself only a result of a complex move¬
ment whereby the modes of consciousness ‘meaning’, perceiv-
ing, and the Understanding, vanish; and it will be equally evi¬
dent that the cognition ofwhat consciousness knows in knowing itself
requires a still more complex movement, the exposition of
which is contained in what follows.
