B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


IV. THE TRUTH OF SELF-CERTAINTY

166. In the previous modes of certainty what is true for con¬
sciousness is something other than itself. But the Notion of this
truth vanishes in the experience of it. What the object imme¬
diately was in itself— mere being in sense-certainty, the concrete
thing of perception, and for the Understanding, a Force
proves to be in truth, not this at all j instead, this in-itself turns
out to be a mode in which the object is only for an other. The
Notion of the object is superseded in the actual object, or the
first, immediate presentation of the object is superseded in ex¬
perience: certainty gives place to truth. But now there has
arisen what did not emerge in these previous relationships, viz.
a certainty which is identical with its truth; for the certainty
is to itself its own object, and consciousness is to itself the truth.
In this there is indeed an otherness; that is to say, consciousness
makes a distinction, but one which at the same time is for con¬
sciousness not a distinction. If we give the name of Notion to the
movement of knowing, and the name of object to knowing as
a passive unity, or as the T, then we see that not only for us ,
but for knowing itself, the object corresponds to the Notion*.
Or alternatively, if we call Notion what the object is in itself
but call the object what it is qua object or for an other , then it
is clear that being -in-itself and bein g-for-an-other are one and the
same. For the in-itself is consciousness; but equally it is that for
which an other (the in-itself) is; and it is for consciousness that
the in-itself of the object, and the being of the object for an
other, are one and the same; the T’ is the content of the con¬
nection and the connecting itself. Opposed to an other, the ‘I’
is its own self, and at the same time it overarches this other
which, for the T, is equally only the T itself.

167. With self-consciousness, then, we have therefore
entered the native realm of truth. We have now to see how the
shape of self-consciousness first makes its appearance. If we con¬
sider this new shape of knowing, the knowing of itself, in rela-



THE TRUTH OF SELF-CERTAINTY I05

tion to that which preceded, viz. the knowing of an other, then
we see that though this other has indeed vanished, its moments
have at the same time no less been preserved, and the loss con¬
sists in this, that here they are present as they are in themselves.
The [mere] being of what is merely ‘meant’, the singleness and
the universality opposed to it of perception, as also the empty inner
being of the Understanding, these are no longer essences, but
are moments of self-consciousness, i.e. abstractions or dis¬
tinctions which at the same time have no reality for conscious¬
ness itself, and are purely vanishing essences. Thus it seems that
only the principal moment itself has been lost, viz. the simple
self-subsistent existence for consciousness. But in point of fact self-
consciousness is the reflection out of the being of the world of
sense and perception, and is essentially the return from otherness.
As self-consciousness, it is movement; but since what it distin-
guisnes from itself is only itself as itself, the difference, as an other¬
ness, is immediately superseded for it; the difference is not, and it
[self-consciousness] is only the motionless tautology of: ‘I am
I’; but since for it the difference does not have the form of being,
it is not self-consciousness. Hence otherness is for it in the form
of a being, or as a distinct moment-, but there is also for conscious¬
ness the unity of itself with this difference as a second distinct
moment. With that first moment, self-consciousness is in the form
of consciousness , and the whole expanse of the sensuous world
is preserved for it, but at the same time only as connected with
the second moment, the unity of self-consciousness with itself;
and hence the sensuous world is for it an enduring existence
which, however, is only appearance, or a difference which, in
itself, is no difference. This antithesis of its appearance and its
truth has, however, for its essence only the truth, viz. the unity
ofself-consciousness with itself; this unity must become essential
to self-consciousness, i.e. self-consciousness is Desire in general.
Consciousness, as self-consciousness, henceforth has a double
object: one is the immediate object, that of sense-certainty and
perception, which however for self-consciousness has the character
of a negative ; and the second, viz. itself, which is the true essence,
and is present in the first instance only as opposed to the first
object. In this sphere, self-consciousness exhibits itself as the
movement in which this antithesis is removed, and the identity
of itself with itself becomes explicit for it.


B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

106

168. But far us, or in itself, the object which for self-conscious¬
ness is the negative element has, on its side, returned into itself,
just as on the other side consciousness has done. Through this
reflection into itself the object has become Life. What self-con¬
sciousness distinguishes from itself as having being, also has in
it in so far as it is posited as being, not merely the character
of sense-certainty and perception, but it is being that is reflected
into itself, and the object of immediate desire is a living thing.
For the in-itself, or the universal result of the relation of the
Understanding to the inwardness of things, is the distinguishing
of what is not to be distinguished, or the unity of what is distin¬
guished. But this unity is, as we have seen, just as much its repul¬
sion from itself; and this Notion sunders itself into the antithesis
of self-consciousness and life: the former is the unity for which
the infinite unity of the differences is; the latter, however, is
only this unity itself, so that it is not at the same time/or itself
To the extent, then, that consciousness is independent, so too is
its object, but only implicitly. Self-consciousness which is simply
for itself and directly characterizes its object as a negative ele¬
ment, oris primarily desire, will therefore, on the contrary, learn
through experience that the object is independent.

169. The determination of Life as it has issued from the
Notion, or the general result with which we enter this sphere,
is sufficient to characterize it without having further to develop
its nature. Its sphere is completely determined in the following
moments. Essence is infinity as the supersession of all distinctions
the pure movement of axial rotation, its self-repose being an
absolutely restless infinity; independence itself, in which the dif¬
ferences of the movement are resolved, the simple essence of
Time which, in this equality with itself, has the stable shape
of Space. The differences, however, are just as much present
as differences in this simple universal medium; for this universal
flux has its negative nature only in being the supersession of
them; but it cannot supersede the different moments if they
do not have an enduring existence [Bestehen). It is this very flux
as a self-identical independence which is itself an enduring exist¬
ence, in which, therefore, they are present as distinct members
and parts existing on their own account. Being no longer has
the significance of abstract being, nor has their pure essentiality
the significance of abstract universality; on the contrary, their




THE TRUTH OF SELF-CERTAINTY


107

being is precisely that simple fluid substance of pure movement
within itself. The difference , however, qua difference, of these
members with respect to one another consists in general in no
other determinateness than that of the moments of infinity or of
the pure movement itself.

170. The independent members are for themselves ; but this
being-for-self is really no less immediately their reflection into
the unity than this unity is the splitting-up into independent
shapes. The unity is divided within itself because it is an abso¬
lutely negative or infinite unity; and because it is what subsists ,
the difference, too, has independence only in it. This indepen¬
dence of the shape appears as something determinate,for an other ,
for the shape is divided within itself; and the supersession of
this dividedness accordingly takes place through an other. But
this supersession is just as much within the shape itself, for it
is just that flux that is the substance of the independent shapes.
This substance, however, is infinite, and hence the shape in its
very subsistence is a dividedness within itself, or the supersession
of its being-for-self.

171. If we distinguish more exactly the moments contained
here, we see that we have, as the first moment, the subsistence
of the independent shapes, or the suppression of what diremp-
tion is in itself, viz. that the shapes have no being in themselves,
no enduring existence. The second moment, however is the sub¬
jection of that existence to the infinity of the difference. In the
first moment there is the existent shape; as being for itself or
being in its determinateness infinite substance, it comes forward
in antithesis to the universal substance, disowns this fluent conti¬
nuity with it and asserts that it is not dissolved in this universal
element, but on the contrary preserves itself by separating itself
from this its inorganic nature, and by consuming it. Life in the
universal fluid medium, a passive separating-out of the shapes
becomes, just by so doing, a movement of those shapes or
becomes Life as a process. The simple universal fluid medium
is the in-itself and the difference of the shapes is the other. But
this fluid medium itself becomes the other through this dif¬
ference ; for now it is for the difference which exists in and for itself,
and consequently is the ceaseless movement by which this pass¬
ive medium is consumed: Life as a living thing.

This inversion , however, is for that reason again an inverted-


o8


B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


ness in its own self. What is consumed is the essence: the individu¬
ality which maintains itself at the expense of the universal, and
which gives itself the feeling of its unity with itself, just by so
doing supersedes its antithesis to the other by means of which
it exists for itself. Its self-given unity with itself is just that fluidity
of the differences or their general dissolution. But, conversely, the
supersession of individual existence is equally the production
of it. For since the essence of the individual shape—universal
Life— an d what exists for itself is in itself simple substance, when
this substance places the other within itself it supersedes this its
simplicity or its essence, i.e. it divides it, and this dividedness
of the differenceless fluid medium is just what establishes indivi¬
duality. Thus the simple substance of Life is the splitting-up
of itself into shapes and at the same time the dissolution of these
existent differences;, and the dissolution of the splitting-up is
just as much a splitting-up and a forming of members. With
this, the two sides of the whole movement which before were
distinguished, viz. the passive separatedness of the shapes in the
general medium of independence, and the process of Life, col¬
lapse into one another. The latter is just as much an imparting
of shape as a supersession of it; and the other, the imparting
of shape, isjust as much a supersession as an articulation of shape.
The fluid element is itself only the abstraction of essence, or it is
actual only as shape; and its articulation of itself is again a split-
ting-up of what is articulated into form or a dissolution of it.
It is the whole round of this activity that constitutes Life: not
what was expressed at the outset, the immediate continuity and
compactness of its essence, nor the enduring form, the discrete
moment existing for itself; nor the pure process of these; nor
yet the simple taking-together of these moments. Life consists
rather in being the self-developing whole which dissolves its de¬
velopment and in this movement simply preserves itself.

172. Since we started from the first immediate unity and
returned through the moments of formation and of process to
the unity of both these moments, and thus back again to the
original simple substance, this reflected unity is different from
the first. Contrasted with that immediate unity, or that unity
expressed as a [mere] being , this second is the universal unity
which contains all these moments as superseded within itself.
It is the simple genus which, in the movement of Life itself,




THE TRUTH OF SELF-CERTAINTY 109

does not exist for itself qua this simple determination; on the con¬
trary, in this result, Life points to something other than itself,
viz. to consciousness, for which Life exists as this unity, or as
genus.

173. This other Life, however, for which the genus as such
exists, and which is genus on its own account, viz. self-conscious¬
ness, exists in the first instance for self-consciousness only as this
simple essence, and has itself as pure T for object. In the course
of its experience which we are now to consider, this abstract
object will enrich itself for the T and undergo the unfolding
which we have seen in the sphere of Life.

174. The simple T is this genus or the simple universal, for
which the differences are not differences only by its being the
negative essence of the shaped independent moments; and self-
consciousness is thus certain of itself only by superseding this
other that presents itself to self-consciousness as an independent
life; self-consciousness is Desire. Certain of the nothingness of
this other, it explicitly affirms that this nothingness is for it the
truth of the other; it destroys the independent object and
thereby gives itself the certainty of itself as a true certainty, a
certainty which has become explicit for self-consciousness itself
in an objective manner.

175. In this satisfaction, however, experience makes it aware
that the object has its own independence. Desire and the self¬
certainty obtained in its gratification, are conditioned by the
object, for self-certainty comes from superseding this other: in
order that this supersession can take place, there must be this
other. Thus self-consciousness, by its negative relation to the
object, is unable to supersede it; it is really because of that rela¬
tion that it produces the object again, and the desire as well.
It is in fact something other than self-consciousness that is the
essence of Desire; and through this experience self-conscious¬
ness has itself realized this truth. But at the same time it is no
less absolutely for itself and it is so only by superseding the
object; and it must experience its satisfaction, for it is the truth.
On account of the independence of the object, therefore, it can
achieve satisfaction only when the object itself effects the nega¬
tion within itself; and it must carry out this negation of itself
in itself, for it is in itself the negative, and must be for the other
what it is. Since the object is in its own self negation, and in


I IO


B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


being so is at the same time independent, it is consciousness.
In the sphere of Life, which is the object of Desire, negation is
present either in an other , viz in Desire, or as a determinateness
opposed to another indifferent form, or as the inorganic uni¬
versal nature of Life. But this universal independent nature in
which negation is present as absolute negation, is the genus as
such, or the genus as self-consciousness. Self-consciousness achieves
its satisfaction only in another self-consciousness.

176. The notion of self-consciousness is only completed in
these three moments: (a) the pure undifferentiated T is its first
immediate object, (b) But this immediacy is itself an absolute
mediation, it is only as a supersession of the independent object,
in other words, it is Desire. The satisfaction of Desire is, it is
true, the reflection of self-consciousness into itself, or the cer¬
tainty that has become truth, (c) But the truth of this certainty
is really a double reflection, the duplication of self-conscious¬
ness. Consciousness has for its object one which, of its own self,
posits its otherness or difference as a nothingness, and in so
doing is independent. The differentiated, merely living , shape
does indeed also supersede its independence in the process of
Life, but it ceases with its distinctive difference to be what it
is. The object of self-consciousness, however, is equally indepen¬
dent in this negativity of itself; and thus it is for itself a genus,
a universal fluid element in the peculiarity of its own separate
being; it is a living self-consciousness.

177. A self-consciousness exists for a self-consciousness. Only so
is it in fact self-consciousness; for only in this way does the unity
of itself in its otherness become explicit for it. The T which
is the object of its Notion is in fact not ‘object 5 ; the object of
Desire, however, is only independent, for it is the universal in¬
destructible substance, the fluid self-identical essence. A self-
consciousness, in being an object, is just as much ‘I 5 as ‘object 5 .
With this, we already have before us the Notion of Spirit. What
still lies ahead for consciousness is the experience of what Spirit
is—this absolute substance which is the unity of the different
independent self-consciousnesses which, in their opposition,
enjoy perfect freedom and independence: ‘I 5 that is ‘We 5 and
‘We 5 that is ‘I 5 . It is in self-consciousness, in the Notion of Spirit,
that consciousness first finds its turning-point, where it leaves
behind it the colourful show of the sensuous here-and-now and







LORDSHIP AND BONDAGE IM

the nightlike void of the supersensible beyond, and steps out
into the spiritual daylight of the present.

A. INDEPENDENCE AND DEPENDENCE OF SELF-
CONSCIOUSNESS: LORDSHIP AND BONDAGE

178. Self-consciousness exists in and for itself when, and by
the fact that, it so exists for another; that is, it exists only in
being acknowledged. The Notion of this its unity in its duplica¬
tion embraces many and varied meanings. Its moments, then,
must on the one hand be held strictly! apart, and on the other
hand must in this differentiation at the same time also be taken
and known as not distinct, or in their opposite significance. The
twofold significance of the distinct moments has in the nature
of self-consciousness to be infinite, or directly the opposite of
the determinateness in which it is posited. The detailed exposi¬
tion of the Notion of this spiritual unity in its duplication will
present us with the process of Recognition.

1 79 - Self-consciousness is faced by another self-conscious¬
ness; it has come out of itself. This has a twofold significance:
first, it has lost itself, for it finds itself as an Other being; secondly,
in doing so it has superseded the other, for it does not see
the other as an essential being, but in the other sees its own
self.

180. It must supersede this otherness of itself. This is the
supersession of the first ambiguity, and is therefore itself a
second ambiguity. First, it must proceed to supersede the other
independent being in order thereby to become certain of itself
as the essential being; secondly, in so doing it proceeds to super¬
sede its own self, for this other is itself.

181. This amhiguous supersession of its ambiguous otherness
is equally an ambiguous return into itself For first, through the
supersession, it receives back its own self, because, by supersed¬
ing its otherness, it again becomes equal to itself; but secondly,
the other self-consciousness equally gives it back again to itself,
for it saw itself in the other, but supersedes this being of itself
in the other and thus lets the other again go free.

182. Now, this movement of self-consciousness in relation to
another self-consciousness has in this way been represented as
the action of one self-consciousness, but this action of the one


I 12


B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


has itself the double significance of being both its own action
and the action of the other as well. For the other is equally inde¬
pendent and self-contained, and there is nothing in it of which
it is not itself the origin. The first does not have the object before
it merely as it exists primarily for desire, but as something that
has an independent existence of its own, which, therefore, it
cannot utilize for its own purposes, if that object does not of
its own accord do what the first does to it. Thus the movement
is simply the double movement of the two self-consciousnesses.
Each sees the other do the same as it does; each does itself what
it demands of the other, and therefore also does what it does
only in so far as the other does the same. Action by one side
only would be useless because what is to happen can only be
brought about by both.

183. Thus the action has a double significance not only
because it is directed against itself as well as against the other,
but also because it is indivisibly the action of one as well as
of the other.

184. In this movement we see repeated the process which
presented itself as the play of Forces, but repeated now in con¬
sciousness. What in that process was for us, is true here of the
extremes themselves. The middle term is self-consciousness
which splits into the extremes; and each extreme is this
exchanging of its own determinateness and an absolute transi¬
tion into the opposite. Although, as consciousness, it does in¬
deed come out of itself yet, though out of itself, it is at the same
time kept back within itself, is for itself and the self outside it,
is for it. It is aware that it at once is, and is not, another con¬
sciousness, and equally that this other is for itself only when it
supersedes itself as being for itself, and is for itself only in the
being-for-selfof the other. Each is for the other the middle term,
through which each mediates itself with itself and unites with
itself; and each is for itself, and for the other, an immediate
being on its own account, which at the same time is such only
through this mediation. They recognize themselves as mutually
recognizing one another.

185. We have now to see how the process of this pure Notion
of recognition, of the duplicating of self-consciousness in its one¬
ness, appears to self-consciousness. At first, it will exhibit
the side of the inequality of the two, or the splitting-up of the


LORDSHIP AND BONDAGE


113

middle term into the extremes which, as extremes, are opposed
to one -another, one being only recognized , the other only
recognizing.

186. Self-consciousness is, to begin with, simple being-for-
self, self-equal through the exclusion from itself of everything
else. For it, its essence and absolute object is T; and in this
immediacy, or in this [mere] being, of its being-for-self, it is
an individual. What is ‘other’ for it is an unessential, negatively
characterized object. But the ‘other’ is also a self-consciousness;
one individual is confronted by another individual. Appearing
thus immediately on the scene, they are for one another like
ordinary objects, independent shapes, individuals submerged in
the being [or immediacy] of Life —for the object in its imme¬
diacy is here determined as Life. They are, for each other , shapes
of consciousness which have not yet accomplished the move¬
ment of absolute abstraction, of rooting-out all immediate
being, and of being merely the purely negative being of self¬
identical consciousness; in other words, they have not as yet
exposed themselves to each other in the form of pure being-
for-self, or as self-consciousnesses. Each is indeed certain of its
own self, but not of the other, and therefore its own self-cer¬
tainty still has no truth. For it would have truth only if its own
being-for-self had confronted it as an independent object, or,
what is the same thing, if the object had presented itself as this
pure self-certainty. But according to the Notion of recognition
this is possible only when each is for the other what the other
is for it, only when each in its own self through its own action,
and again through the action of the other, achieves this pure
abstraction of being-for-self.

187. The presentation of itself, however, as the pure abstrac¬
tion of self-consciousness consists in showing itself as the pure
negation of its objective mode, or in showing that it is not
attached to any specific existence , not to the individuality com¬
mon to existence as such, that it is not attached to life. This
presentation is a twofold action: action on the part of the other,
and action on its own part. In so far as it is the action of the
other , each seeks the death of the other. But in doing so, the
second kind of action, action on its own part, is also involved;
for the former involves the staking of its own life. Thus the rela¬
tion of the two self-conscious individuals is such that they prove


B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


1 14

themselves and each other through a life-and-death struggle.
They must engage in this struggle, for they must raise their cer¬
tainty of being for themselves to truth, both in the case of the
other and in their own case. And it is only through staking one’s
life that freedom is won; only thus is it proved that for self-
consciousness, its essential heing is not [just] being, not the im¬
mediate form in which it appears, not its submergence in the
expanse of life, but rather that there is nothing present in it
which could not be regarded as a vanishing moment, that it
is only pure being-for-self. The individual who has not risked
his life may well be recognized as a person , but he has not
attained to the truth of this recognition as an independent self-
consciousness. Similarly, just as each stakes his own life, so each
must seek the other’s death, for it values the other no more than
itself; its essential being is present to it in the form of an ‘other’,
it is outside of itself and must rid itself of its self-externality.
The other is an immediate consciousness entangled in a variety
of relationships, and it must regard its otherness as a pure being-
for-self or as an absolute negation.

188. This trial by death, however, does away with the truth
which was supposed to issue from it, and so, too, with the cer¬
tainty of self generally. For just as life is the natural setting of
consciousness, independence without absolute negativity, so
death is the natural negation of consciousness, negation without
independence, which thus remains without the required signifi¬
cance of recognition. Death certainly shows that each staked
his life and held it of no account, both in himself and in the
other; but that is not for those who survived this struggle. They
put an end to their consciousness in its alien setting of natural
existence, that is to say, they put an end to themselves, and
are done away with as extremes wanting to be for themselves , or
to have an existence of their own. But with this there vanishes
from their interplay the essential moment of splitting into
extremes with opposite characteristics; and the middle term
collapses into a lifeless unity which is split into lifeless, merely
immediate, unopposed extremes; and the two do not reciproc¬
ally give and receive one another back from each other cons¬
ciously, but leave each other free only indifferently, like things.
Their act is an abstract negation, not the negation coming from
consciousness, which supersedes in such a way as to preserve


LORDSHIP AND BONDAGE i, 5

and maintain what is superseded, and consequently survives
its own supersession.

189. In this experience, self-consciousness learns that life is
as essential to it as pure self-consciousness. In immediate self-
consciousness the simple ‘T is absolute mediation, and has as
its essential moment lasting independence. The dissolution of
that simple unity is the result of the first experience; through
this there is posited a pure self-consciousness, and a conscious¬
ness which is not purely for itself but for another, i.e. is a merely
immediate consciousness, or consciousness in the form of
thingkood. Both moments are essential. Since to begin with they
are unequal and opposed, and their reflection into a unity has
not yet been achieved, they exist as two opposed shapes of con¬
sciousness; one is the independent consciousness whose essential
nature is to be for itself, the other is the dependent consciousness
whose essential nature is simply to live or to be for another.
The former is lord, the other is bondsman.

190. The lord is the consciousness that exists for itself but
no longer merely the Notion of such a consciousness. Rather,
it is a consciousness existing for itself which is mediated with
itself through another consciousness, i.e. through a conscious¬
ness whose nature it is to be bound up with an existence that
is independent, or thinghood in general. The lord puts himself
into relation with both of these moments, to a thing as such,
the object of desire, and to the consciousness for which
thinghood is the essential characteristic. And since he is (a) qua
the Notion of self-consciousness an immediate relation of being -
for-self but (b) is now at the same time mediation, or a being-
for-self which is for itself only through another, he is related
(a) immediately to both, and (b) mediately to each through
the other. The lord relates himself mediately to the bondsman
through a being [a thing] that is independent, for it is just this
which holds the bondsman in bondage; it is his chain from
which he could not break free in the struggle, thus proving him¬
self to be dependent, to possess his independence in thinghood.
But the lord is the power over this thing, for he proved in the
struggle that it is something merely negative; since he is the
power over this thing and this again is the power over the other
[the bondsman], it follows that he holds the other in subjection.
Equally, the lord relates himself mediately to the thing through


B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


116

the bondsman; the bondsman, qua self-consciousness in general,
also relates himself negatively to the thing, and takes away its
independence; but at the same time the thing is independent
vis-a-vis the bondsman, whose negating of it, therefore, cannot
go the length of being altogether done with it to the point of
annihilation; in other words, he only works on it. For the lord,
on the other hand, the immediate relation becomes through this
mediation the sheer negation of the thing, or the enjoyment
of it. What desire failed to achieve, he succeeds in doing, viz.
to have done with the thing altogether, and to achieve satisfac¬
tion in the enjoyment of it. Desire failed to do this because of
the thing’s independence; but the lord, who has interposed the
bondsman between it and himself, takes to himself only the de¬
pendent aspect of the thing and has the pure enjoyment of it.
The aspect of its independence he leaves to the bondsman, who
works on it.

191. In both of these moments the lord achieves his recogni¬
tion through another consciousness; for in them, that other con¬
sciousness is expressly something unessential, both by its work¬
ing on the thing, and by its dependence on a specific existence.
In neither case can it be lord over the being of the thing and
achieve absolute negation of it. Here, therefore, is present this
moment of recognition, viz. that the other consciousness sets
aside its own being-for-self, and in so doing itself does what the
first does to it. Similarly, the other moment too is present, that
this action of the second is the first’s own action; for what the
bondsman does is really the action of the lord. The latter’s essen¬
tial nature is to exist only for himself; he is the sheer negative
power for whom the thing is nothing. Thus he is the pure, essen¬
tial action in this relationship, while the action of the bondsman
is impure and unessential. But for recognition proper the
moment is lacking, that what the lord does to the other he also
does to himself, and what the bondsman does to himself he
should also do to the other. The outcome is a recognition that
is one-sided and unequal.

192. In this recognition the unessential consciousness is for
the lord the object, which constitutes the truth of his certainty
of himself. But it is clear that this object does not correspond
to its Notion, but rather that the object in which the lord has
achieved his lordship has in reality turned out to be something


LORDSHIP AND BONDAGE 117

quite different from an independent consciousness. What now
really confronts him is not an independent consciousness, but
a dependent one. He is, therefore, not certain of being-for-self
as the truth of himself. On the contrary, his truth is in reality
the unessential consciousness and its unessential action.

193. The truth of the independent consciousness is accord¬
ingly the servile consciousness of the bondsman. This, it is true,
appears at first outside of itself and not as the truth of self-con¬
sciousness. But just as lordship showed that its essential nature
is the reverse of what it wants to be, so too servitude in its con¬
summation will really turn into the opposite of what it imme¬
diately is; as a consciousness forced back into itself, it will with¬
draw into itself and be transformed into a truly independent
consciousness.

194. We have seen what servitude is only in relation to lord-
ship. But it is a self-consciousness, and we have now to consider
what as such it is in and for itself. To begin with, servitude has
the lord for its essential reality; hence the truth for it is the inde¬
pendent consciousness that is for itself. However, servitude is
not yet aware that this truth is implicit in it. But it does in fact
contain within itself this truth of pure negativity and being-
for-self, for it has experienced this its own essential nature. For
this consciousness has been fearful, not of this or that particular
thing or just at odd moments, but its whole being has been
seized with dread; for it has experienced the fear of death, the
absolute Lord. In that experience it has been quite un¬
manned, has trembled in every fibre ofits being, and everything
solid and stable has been shaken to its foundations. But this pure
universal movement, the absolute melting-away of everything
stable, is the simple, essential nature of self-consciousness, abso¬
lute negativity, pure being-for-self which consequently is implicit
in this consciousness. This moment of pure being-for-self is also
explicit for the bondsman, for in the lord it exists for him as his
object. Furthermore, his consciousness is not this dissolution of
everything stable merely in principle; in his service he actually
brings this about. Through his service he rids himself of his
attachment to natural existence in every single detail; and gets
rid of it by working on it.

195. However, the feeling of absolute power both in general,
and in the particular form of service, is only implicitly this dis¬
solution, and although the fear of the lord is indeed the begin-


1,8 B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

ning of wisdom, consciousness is not therein aware that it is a
being-for-self. Through work, however, the bondsman becomes
conscious of what he truly is. In the moment which corresponds
to desire in the lord’s consciousness, it did seem that the aspect
of unessential relation to the thing fell to the lot of the bonds¬
man, since in that relation the thing retained its independence.
Desire has reserved to itself the pure negating of the object and
thereby its unalloyed feeling of self. But that is the reason why
this satisfaction is itself only a fleeting one, for it lacks the side
of objectivity and permanence. Work, on the other hand, is
desire held in check, fleetingness staved off; in other words,
work forms and shapes the thing. The negative relation to the
object becomes its form and something permanent , because it is
precisely for the worker that the object has independence. This
negative middle term or the formative activity is at the same time
the individuality or pure being-for-self of consciousness which
now, in the work outside of it, acquires an element of per¬
manence. It is in this way, therefore, that consciousness, qua
worker, comes to see in the independent being [of the object]
its own independence.

196. But the formative activity has not only this positive sig¬
nificance that in it the pure being-for-self of the servile con¬
sciousness acquires an existence; it also has, in contrast with
its first moment, the negative significance of fear. Fo^, in fash¬
ioning the thing, the bondsman’s o\vn negativity, his being-
for-self, becomes an object for him only through his setting at
nought the existing shape confronting him. But this objective
negative moment is none other than the alien being before which
it has trembled. Now, however, he destroys this alien negative
moment, posits himself as a negative in the permanent order
of things, and thereby becomes for himself someone existing on
his own account. In the lord, the being-for-self is an ‘other’ for
the bondsman, or is only for him [i.e. is not his own]; in fear
the being-for-selfis present in the bondsman himself; in fashion¬
ing the thing, he becomes aware that being-for-self belongs to
him , that he himself exists essentially and actually in his own
right. The shape does not become something other than himself
through being made external to him; for it is precisely this shape
that is his pure being-for-self, which in this externality is seen
by him to be the truth. Through this rediscovery of himself by


FREEDOM OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS ng

himself, the bondsman realizes that it is precisely in his work
wherein he seemed to have only an alienated existence that he
acquires a mind of his own. For this reflection, the two moments
of fear and service as such, as also that of formative activity,
are necessary, both being at the same time in a universal mode.
Without the discipline of service and obedience, fear remains
at the formal stage, and does not extend to the known real world
of existence. Without the formative activity, fear remains in¬
ward and mute, and consciousness does not become explicitly
for itself. If consciousness fashions the thing without that initial
absolute fear, it is only an empty self-centred attitude; for its
form or negativity is not negativity per se , and therefore its
formative activity cannot give it a consciousness of itself as
essential being. If it has not experienced absolute fear but only
some lesser dread, the negative being has remained for it some¬
thing external, its substance has not been infected by it through
and through. Since the entire contents of its natural conscious¬
ness have not been jeopardized, determinate being still in prin¬
ciple attaches to it; having a ‘mind of one’s own’ is self-will, a
freedom which is still enmeshed in servitude. Just as little as
the pure form can become essential being for it, just as little
is that form, regarded as extended to the particular, a universal
formative activity, an absolute Notion; rather it is a skill which
is master over some things, but not over the universal power
and the whole, of objective being.


FREEDOM OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS:

B. STOICISM, SCEPTICISM, AND THE UNHAPPY
CONSCIOUSNESS

197. For the independent self-consciousness, it is only the
pure abstraction of the ‘I’ that is its essential nature, and, when
it does develop its own differences, this differentiation does not
become a nature that is objective and intrinsic to it. Thus this
self-consciousness does not become an ‘I’ that in its simplicity
is genuinely self-differentiating, or that in this absolute dif¬
ferentiation remains identical with itself. On the other hand,
the consciousness that is forced back into itself becomes, in its


120 B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

formative activity, its own object in the form of the thine it has
as loned, and at the same time sees in the lord a consciousness
that exists as a being-for-self. But for the subservient conscious¬
ness as such, these two moments —itself as an independent
object, and this object as a mode of consciousness, and hence
its own essential nature—fall apart. Since, however, the form
and the being-for-self are for us, or in themselves, the same, and
since in the Notion of independent consciousness the intrinsic
being is consciousness, the moment of intrinsic beine or
thmghood which received its form in being fashioned is no other
substance than consciousness. We are in the presence of self-
consciousness in a new shape, a consciousness which, as the i n -
mtude of consciousness or as its own pure movement, is aware
ot itsell as essential being, a being which thinks or is a free self-
consciousness. For to think does not mean to be an abstract T
ut an I which has at the same time the significance of intrinsic
being, of having itself for object, or of relating itself to objective
being in such a way that its significance is the being-for-self of
the consciousness for which it is [an object]. For in thinking, the
object does not present itself in picture-thoughts but in Notions
re. in a distinct being-in-itself or intrinsic being, consciousness

D f C1 ?f 8 w^ ed ' ately aware that this is not ar, y thin g distinct from
‘ ; What 1S Poured or figuratively conceived, what imme¬

diately is, has, as such, the form of being something other than
consciousness; but a Notion is also something that immediately
is, and this distinction, in so far as it is present in consciousness
itself, is its determinate content; but since this content is at the
same time a content grasped in thought, consciousness remains
immediately aware of its unity with this determinate and distinct
being, not, as in the case of a picture-thought, where conscious¬
ness still has specially to bear in mind that this is its picture-
thought; on the contrary, the Notion is for me straightway my
Notion. In thinking, I am free, because I am not in an other,
but remain simply and solely in communion with myself, and
the object, which is for me the essential being, is in undivided
unity my being-for-myself; and my activity in conceptual
thinking is a movement within myself. It is essential, however,
in thus characterizing this shape of self-consciousness to bear
firmly in mind that it is thinking consciousness in general, that
its object is an immediate unity of being-in-itself and being-for-ilself






121


FREEDOM OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

The selfsame consciousness that repels itself from itself becomes
aware of itself as the element of being-in-itself\ but at first it
knows itself to be this element only as a universal mode of being
in general, not as it exists objectively in the development and
process of its manifold being.

198. This freedom of self-consciousness when it appeared as
a conscious manifestation in the history of Spirit has, as we know,
been called Stoicism. Its principle is that consciousness is a
being that thinks , and that consciousness holds something to be
essentially important, or true and good only in so far as it thinks
it to be such.

199 - The manifold self-differentiating expanse of life, with
all its detail and complexity, is the object on which desire and
work operate. This manifold activity has now contracted into
the simple positing of differences in the pure movement of
thinking. Essential importance no longer attaches to the dif¬
ference as a specific thing , or as consciousness of a specific natural
existence , as a feeling, or as desire and its object, whether this
is posited by myself or by an alien consciousness. What alone
has importance is the difference posited by thought , or the dif¬
ference which from the very first is not distinct from myself.
This consciousness accordingly has a negative attitude towards
the lord and bondsman relationship. As lord, it does not have
its truth in the bondsman, nor as bondsman is its truth in the
lord’s will and in his service; on the contrary, whether on the
throne or in chains, in the utter dependence of its individual
existence, its aim is to be free, and to maintain that lifeless in¬
difference which steadfastly withdraws from the bustle of exist¬
ence, alike from being active as passive, into the simple essenti¬
ality of thought. Self-will is the freedom which entrenches itself
in some particularity and is still in bondage, while Stoicism is
the freedom which always comes directly out of bondage and
returns into the pure universality of thought. As a universal
form of the World-Spirit, Stoicism could only appear on the
scene in a time of universal fear and bondage, but also a time
of universal culture which had raised itself to the level of
thought.

200. Now, it is true that for this self-consciousness the essence
is neither an other than itself, nor the pure abstraction of the
T’, but an T’ which has the otherness within itself, though in




122


B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS *


the form of thought , so that in its otherness it has directly
returned into itself. Yet at the same time this its essence is only
an abstract essence. The freedom of self-consciousness is in¬
different to natural existence and has therefore let this equally go
free : the reflection is a twofold one. Freedom in thought has only
pure thought as its truth, a truth lacking the fullness of life. Hence
freedom in thought, too, is only the Notion of freedom, not the
living reality of freedom itself. For the essence of that freedom
is at first only thinking in general, the form as such [of thought],
which has turned away from the independence of things and
returned into itself. But since individuality in its activity should
show itself to be alive, or in its thinking should grasp the living
world as a system of thought, there would have to be present
in thought itself a content for that individuality, in the one case
a content of what is good, and in the other of what is true, in
order that what is an object for consciousness should contain
no other ingredient whatever except the Notion which is the
essence. But here the Notion as an abstraction cuts itself off from
the multiplicity of things, and thus has no content in its own
self but one that is given to it. Consciousness does indeed destroy
the content as an alien immediacy \Sein ] when it thinks it; but
the Notion is a determinate Notion, and this determinateness of
the Notion is the alien element which it has within it. Stoicism,
therefore, was perplexed when it was asked for what was called
a ‘criterion of truth as such’, i.e. strictly speaking, for a content
of thought itself. To the question, What is good and true, it again
gave for answer the contentless thought: The True and the Good
shall consist in reasonableness. But this self-identity of thought
is again only the pure form in which nothing is determined.
The True and the Good, wisdom and virtue, the general terms
beyond which Stoicism cannot get, are therefore in a general
way no doubt uplifting, but since they cannot in fact produce
any expansion of the content, they soon become tedious.

201. This thinking consciousness as determined in the form
of abstract freedom is thus only the incomplete negation of
otherness. Withdrawn from existence only into itself, it has not
there achieved its consummation as absolute negation of that
existence. The content, it is true, only counts as thought, but
also as thought that is determinate and at the same time
determinateness as such.


123


FREEDOM OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

202. Scepticism! s the realization of that^of which Stoicism was
only the Notion, and is the actual experience of what the free¬
dom of thought is. This is in itself the negative and must exhibit
itself as such. With the reflection of self-consciousness into the
simple thought of itself, the independent existence or per¬
manent determinateness that stood over against that reflection
has, as a matter of fact, fallen outside of the infinitude of
thought. In Scepticism, now, the wholly unessential and non-
independent character of this ‘other’ becomes explicit for con¬
sciousness ; the [abstract] thought becomes the concrete thinking
which annihilates the being of the world in all its manifold
determinateness, and the negativity of free self-consciousness
comes to know itself in the many and varied forms of life as
a real negativity.

It is clear that just as Stoicism corresponds to the Notion of
the independent consciousness which appeared as the lord and
bondsman relationship, so Scepticism corresponds to its realiza¬
tion as a negative attitude towards otherness, to desire and work.
But although desire and work were unable to effect the negation
for self-consciousness, this polemical bearing towards the mani¬
fold independence of things will, on the other hand, be success¬
ful, because it turns against them as a free self-consciousness
that is already complete in its own self; more specifically,
because it is thinking , or is in its own self infinite, and in this
infinitude the independent things in their differences from one
another are for it only vanishing magnitudes. The differences,
which in the pure thinking of self-consciousness are only the
abstraction of differences, here become the entirety of the dif¬
ferences, and the whole of differentiated being becomes a dif¬
ference of self-consciousness.

203. Thus the foregoing has defined the nature of the activity
of scepticism as such, and the way in which it operates. It
exhibits the dialectical movement which Sense-certainty, Percep¬
tion, and the Understanding each is; as also the unessential
character of what, in the relationship of lord and bondsman,
and for abstract thinking itself, is held to be a determinate ele¬
ment. That relationship at the same time embraces a specific
mode in which ethical laws, too, are present as sovereign com¬
mands. The determinations in abstract thinking, however, are
scientific Notions in which [formal] contentless thinking


B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


124

spreads itself, attaching the Notion in fact in a merely external
way to the being constituting its content, and which for it is
independent, and holding as valid only determinate Notions, even
though these are only pure abstractions.

204. Dialectic as a negative movement, just as it imme¬
diately is, at first appears to consciousness as something which
has it at its mercy, and which does not have its source in con¬
sciousness itself. As Scepticism, on the other hand, it is a
moment of self-consciousness, to which it does not happen that
its truth and reality vanish without its knowing how, but which,
in the certainty of its freedom, makes this ‘other’ which claims
to be real, vanish. What Scepticism causes to vanish is not only
objective reality as such, but its own relationship to it, in which
the ‘other’ is held to be objective and is established as such,
and hence, too, its perceiving, along with firmly securing what
it is in danger of losing, viz. sophistry, and the truth it has itself
determined and established. Through this self-conscious nega¬
tion it procures for its own self the certainty of its freedom,
generates the experience of that freedom, and thereby raises
it to truth. What vanishes is the determinate element, or the
moment of difference, which, whatever its mode of being and
whatever its source, sets itself up as something fixed and immut¬
able. It contains no permanent element, and must vanish before
thought, because the ‘different’ is just this, not to be in posses¬
sion of itself, but to have its essential being only in an other.
Thinking, however, is the insight into this nature of the ‘dif¬
ferent’, it is the negative essence, as simple.

205. The sceptical self-consciousness thus experiences in the
flux of all that would stand secure before it its own freedom
as given and preserved by itself. It is aware of this stoical in¬
difference of a thinking which thinks itself, the unchanging and
genuine certainty of itself. This self-certainty does not issue from
something alien, whose complex development was deposited
within it, a result which would leave behind it the process of
its coming to be. On the contrary, consciousness itselfis the abso¬
lute dialectical unrest, this medley of sensuous and intellectual
representations whose differences coincide, and whose identity
is equally again dissolved, for it is itself determinateness as con¬
trasted with the non-identical. But it is just in this process that
this consciousness, instead of being self-identical, is in fact noth-


FREEDOM OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS I25

in g but a purely casual, confused medley, the dizziness of a per¬
petually self-engendered disorder. It is itself aware of this; for
itself maintains and creates this restless confusion. Hence it also
admits to it, it owns to being a wholly contingent, single, and
separate consciousness—a consciousness which is empirical ,
which takes its guidance from what has no reality for it, which
obeys what is for it not an essential being, which does those things
and brings to realization what it knows has no truth for it. But
equally, while it takes itself in this way to be a single and separ¬
ate, contingent and, in fact, animal life, and a lost self-con¬
sciousness, it also, on the contrary, converts itself again into a
consciousness that is universal and self-identical; for it is the
negativity of all singularity and all difference. From this self-
identity, or within its own self, it falls back again into the former
contingency and confusion, for this same spontaneous nega¬
tivity has to do solely with what is single and separate, and
occupies itself with what is contingent. This consciousness is
therefore the unconscious, thoughtless rambling which passes
back and forth from the one extreme of self-identical self-con¬
sciousness to the other extreme of the contingent consciousness
that is both bewildered and bewildering. It does not itself bring
these two thoughts of itself together. At one time it recognizes
that its freedom lies in rising above all the confusion and contin¬
gency of existence, and at another time equally admits to a
relapse into occupying itself with what is unessential. It lets the
unessential content in its thinking vanish; but just in doing so
it is the consciousness of something unessential. It pronounces
an absolute vanishing, but the pronouncement is, and this con¬
sciousness is the vanishing that, is pronounced. It affirms the
nullity of seeing, hearing, etc., yet it is itself seeing, hearing,
etc. It affirms the nullity of ethical principles, and lets its con¬
duct be governed by these very principles. Its deeds and its
words always belie one another and equally it has itself the
doubly contradictory consciousness of unchangeableness and
sameness, and of utter contingency and non-identity with itself.
But it keeps the poles of this its self-contradiction apart, and
adopts the same attitude to it as it does in its purely negative
activity in general. Point out likeness or identity to it, and it
will point out unlikeness or non-identity; and when it is now
confronted with what it has just asserted, it turns round and


26


B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


points out likeness or identity. Its talk is in fact like the squab¬
bling of self-willed children, one of whom says A if the other
says B , and in turn says B if the other says A, and who by con¬
tradicting themselves buy for themselves the pleasure of continu¬
ally contradicting one another.

206. In Scepticism, consciousness truly experiences itself as
internally contradictory. From this experience emerges a new
form of consciousness which brings together the two thoughts
which Scepticism holds apart. Scepticism’s lack of thought
about itself must vanish, because it is in fact one consciousness
which contains within itself these two modes. This new form
is, therefore, one which knows that it is the dual consciousness
of itself, as self-liberating, unchangeable, and self-identical, and
as self-bewildering and self-perverting, and it is the awareness
of this self-contradictory nature of itself.

In Stoicism, self-consciousness is the simple freedom of itself.
In Scepticism, this freedom becomes a reality, negates the other
side of determinate existence, but really duplicates itself and
now knows itself to be a duality. Consequently, the duplication
which formerly was divided between two individuals, the lord
and the bondsman, is now lodged in one. The duplication of
self-consciousness within itself, which is essential in the Notion
of Spirit, is thus here before us, but not yet in its unity: the
Unhappy Consciousness is the consciousness of self as a dual-
natured, merely contradictory being.

207. This unhappy , inwardly disrupted consciousness, since its
essentially contradictory nature is for it a single consciousness,
must for ever have present in the one consciousness the other
also; and thus it is driven out of each in turn in the very moment
when it imagines it has successfully attained to a peaceful unity
with the other. Its true return into itself, or its reconciliation
with itself will, however, display the Notion of Spirit that has
become a living Spirit, and has achieved an actual existence,
because it already possesses as a single undivided consciousness
a dual nature. The Unhappy Consciousness itself is the gazing
of one self-consciousness into another, and itself is both, and
the unity of both is also its essential nature. But it is not as yet
explicitly aware that this is its essential nature, or that it is the
unity of both.

208. Since it is, to begin with, only the immediate unity of the


FREEDOM OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


127


two and so takes them to be, not the same, but opposites, one
of them, viz. the simple Unchangeable, it takes to be the essential
Being; but the other, the protean Changeable, it takes to be
the unessential. The two are, for the Unhappy Consciousness,
alien to one another; and because it-is itself the consciousness
of this contradiction, it identifies itself with the changeable con¬
sciousness, and takes itself to be the unessential Being. But as
consciousness of unchangeableness, or of simple essential Being,
it must at the same time set about freeing itself from the unessen¬
tial, i.e. from itself. For though it indeed takes itself to be merely
the Changeable, and the Unchangeable is, for it, an alien Being,
yet it is itself a simple, hence unchangeable, consciousness, and
hence is aware that this consciousness is its own essence,
although in such a way that again it does not itself take
the essence to be its own. The attitude it assigns to both
cannot therefore be one of mutual indifference, i.e. it cannot
itself be indifferent towards the Unchangeable; rather, it
is itself directly both of them, and the relation of the two
is for it a relation of essential being to the unessential, so that
this latter has to be set aside; but since for it both are
equally essential and contradictory, it is merely the contradic¬
tory movement in which one opposite does not come to rest
in its opposite, but in it. only produces itself afresh as an
opposite.

209. Here, then, we have a struggle against an enemy, to
vanquish whom is really to suffer defeat, where victory in one
consciousness is really lost in its opposite. Consciousness of life,
of its existence and activity, is only an agonizing over this exist¬
ence and activity, for therein it is conscious that its essence is
only its opposite, is conscious only of its own nothingness. Rais¬
ing itself out of this consciousness it goes over into the Un¬
changeable; but this elevation is itself this same consciousness.
It is, therefore, directly consciousness of the opposite, viz. of
itself as a particular individual. The Unchangeable that enters
into consciousness is through this very fact at the same time
affected by individuality, and is only present with the latter;
individuality, instead of having been extinguished in the con¬
sciousness of the Unchangeable, only continues to arise there¬
from.

210. In this movement, however, consciousness experiences


128


B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


just this emergence of individuality in the Unchangeable, and
of the Unchangeable in individuality. Consciousness becomes
aware of individuality in general in the Unchangeable, and at
the same time of its own individuality in the latter. For the truth
of this movement is just the oneness of this dual consciousness.
This unity, however, in the first instance, becomes for it one
in which the difference of both is still the dominant feature. Thus
there exist for consciousness three different ways in which in¬
dividuality is linked with the Unchangeable. Firstly, it again
appears to itself as opposed to the Unchangeable, and is thrown
back to the beginning of the struggle which is throughout the
element in which the whole relationship subsists. Secondly, con¬
sciousness learns that individuality belongs to the Unchange¬
able itself, so that it assumes the form ofindividuality into which
the entire mode of existence passes. Thirdly, it finds its own
self as this particular individual in the Unchangeable. The first
Unchangeable it knows only as the alien Being who passes
judgement on the particular individual; since, secondly, the
Unchangeable is a form ofindividuality like itself, consciousness
becomes, thirdly, Spirit, and experiences the joy of finding itself
therein, and becomes aware of the reconciliation of its individu¬
ality with the universal.

211. What is set forth here as the mode and relationship of
the Unchangeable has appeared as the experience through which
the divided self-consciousness passes in its wretchedness. Now,
this experience, it is true, is not its own one-sided movement, for
it is itself the unchangeable consciousness, and this, con¬
sequently, is at the same time a particular individual conscious¬
ness too; and the movement is just as much a movement of the
unchangeable consciousness, which makes its appearance in
that movement as much as the other. For the movement runs
through these moments: first, the Unchangeable is opposed to
individuality in general; then, being itself an individual, it is
opposed to another individual; and finally, it is one with it.
But this reflection, so far as it is made by us, is here premature,
for what has come before for us so far is only unchangeableness
as unchangeableness of consciousness , which for that reason is not
genuine unchangeableness, but one still burdened with an anti¬
thesis, not the Unchangeable in and for itself; we do not know,
therefore, how the latter will behave. Here, we know only that


FREEDOM OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


129


for consciousness, which is our object here, the determinations
indicated above appear in the Unchangeable.

212. For this reason, therefore, the unchangeable conscious¬
ness also retains in its very form the basic character of divided¬
ness and being-for-self in contrast to the individual conscious¬
ness. Consequently, for the latter, the fact that the Unchange¬
able receives the form of individuality is only a contingent
happening; just as it also merely finds itself opposed to it, so that
the relation seems to result from its own nature. That, finally,
it does find itself in the Unchangeable, appears to it to be brought
about partly, no doubt, by itself, or to take place because it
is itself an individual; but this unity, both as regards its origin
and the fact that it is, appears partly due to the Unchangeable;
and the antithesis persists within this unity itself. In fact,
through the Unchangeable’s assuming a definite form, the
moment of the beyond not only persists, but really is more
firmly established; for if the beyond seems to have been brought
closer to the individual consciousness through the form of an
actuality that is individual, it henceforth on the other hand con¬
fronts him as an opaque sensuous unit with all the obstinacy
ofwhat is actual. The hope of becoming one with it must remain
a hope, i.e. without fulfilment and present fruition, for between
the hope and its fulfilment there stands precisely the absolute
contingency or inflexible indifference which lies in the very
assumption of definite form, which was the ground of hope. By
the nature of this immediately present unit , through the actual
existence in which it has clothed itself, it necessarily follows that
in the world of time it has vanished, and that in space it had
a remote existence and remains utterly remote.

213. If at first the mere Notion of the divided consciousness
was characterized by the effort to set aside its particular indivi¬
duality and to become the unchangeable consciousness, its
efforts from now on are directed rather to setting aside its rela¬
tion with the pure formless Unchangeable, and to coming into
relation only with the Unchangeable in its embodied or in¬
carnate form. For the oneness of the particular individual with
the Unchangeable is henceforth the essence and the object for
this consciousness, just as in the mere Notion of it the formless
abstract Unchangeable was the essential object; and the rela¬
tion of this absolute dividedness of the Notion is now what it


130


B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


has to turn away from. The initially external relation to the
incarnate Unchangeable as an alien reality has to be trans¬
formed into a relation in which it becomes absolutely one with
it.

214. The movement in which the unessential consciousness
strives to attain this oneness is itself threefold in accordance with
the threefold relation this consciousness will have with its in¬
carnate beyond: first, as pure consciousness; second, as a par¬
ticular individual who approaches the actual world in the forms
of desire and work; and third, as consciousness that is aware
of its own being-for-self. We have now to see how these three
modes of its being are present and determined in that general
relationship.

215. At first, then, this consciousness being taken as pure con¬
sciousness, the incarnate Unchangeable when it is an object for
pure consciousness seems to be present in its own proper nature.
But this, its own proper nature, has not yet come into existence,
as we have already remarked. In order that it should appear
in consciousness in its own proper nature, this would certainly
have to come about from its side, rather than from the side of
consciousness. Thus its presence here is, at first, only one-sidedly
due to consciousness, and just for that reason is not perfect and
genuine, but remains burdened with imperfection or an anti¬
thesis.

216. But although the Unhappy Consciousness does not
have the enjoyment of this presence, it has at the same time
advanced beyond pure thinking in so far as this is the abstract
thinking of Stoicism which turns its back on individuality alto¬
gether, and beyond the merely unsettled thinking of Scepti¬
cism which is in fact only individuality in the form of an un¬
conscious contradiction and ceaseless movement. It has
advanced beyond both of these; it brings and holds together
pure thinking and particular individuality, but has not yet risen
to that thinking where consciousness as a particular individu¬
ality is reconciled with pure thought itself. It occupies rather
this intermediate position where abstract thinking is in contact
with the individuality of consciousness qua individuality. The
Unhappy Consciousness is this contact; it is the unity of pure
thinking and individuality; also it knows itself to be this thinking
individuality or pure thinking, and knows the Unchangeable


FREEDOM OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS 131

itself essentially as an individuality. But what it does not know
is that this its object, the Unchangeable, which it knows essenti¬
ally in the form of individuality, is its own self, is itself the indivi¬
duality of consciousness.

217. In this first mode, therefore, where we consider it as
pure consciousness, it does not relate itself as a thinking conscious¬
ness to its object, but, though it is indeed in itself, or implicitly,
a pure thinking individuality, and its object is just this pure
thinking (although the relation of one to the other is not itself pure
thinking), it is only a movement towards thinking, and so is devo¬
tion. Its thinking as such is no more than the chaotic jingling
of bells, or a mist of warm incense, a musical thinking that does
not get as far as the Notion, which would be the sole, immanent
objective mode of thought. This infinite, pure inner feeling does
indeed come into possession of its object; but this does not make
its appearance in conceptual form, not as something [specula¬
tively] comprehended, and appears therefore as something
alien. What we have here, then, is the inward movement of
the pure heart which feels itself, but itself as agonizingly self-
divided, the movement of an infinite yearning which is certain
that its essence is such a pure heart, a pure thinking which thinks
of itself as a particular individuality, certain of being known and
recognized by this object, precisely because the latter thinks of
itself as an individuality. At the same time, however, this
essence is the unattainable beyond which, in being laid hold of,
flees, or rather has already flown. It has already flown; for it
is in part the Unchangeable which thinks of itself as an individu¬
ality, and consciousness therefore directly attains in it its own
self— its own self, but as the antithesis of the Unchangeable; in¬
stead of laying hold of the essence, it only feels it and has fallen
back into itself. Since, in attaining itself, consciousness is unable
to get away from itself as this antithesis to the Unchangeable, it
has, instead of laying hold of the essence, only laid hold of what is
unessential. Just as, on the one hand, when striving to find itself
in the essence it takes hold only of its o\vn separate existence,
so on the other hand it cannot lay hold of the ‘other’ as an indivi¬
dual or as an actual Being. Where that ‘other’ is sought, it cannot
be found, for it is supposed to be just a beyond, something that
can not be found. When sought as a particular individual, it
is not a universal individuality in the form of thought, not a


B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


132

Notion , but an individual in the form of an object, or an actual
individual; an object of immediate sense-certainty, and for that
very reason only something that has already vanished. Con¬
sciousness, therefore, can only find as a present reality the grave
of its life. But because this grave is itself an actual existence and
it is contrary to the nature of what actually exists to afford a
lasting possession, the presence of that grave, too, is merely the
struggle of an enterprise doomed to failure. But having learned
from experience that the grave of its actual unchangeable Being
has no actuality , that the vanished individuality , because it has
vanished, is not the true individuality, consciousness will aban¬
don its quest for the unchangeable individuality as an actual
existence, or will stop trying to hold on to what has vanished.
Only then is it capable of finding individuality in its genuine
or universal form.

218. But, in the first instance, the return of the feeling heart into
itself is to be taken to mean that it has an actual existence as
an individual. It is the pure heart which/or us or in itself has found
itself and is inwardly satiated, for although for itself in its feeling
the essential Being is separated from it, yet this feeling is, in
itself, a feeling of self\ it has felt the object of its pure feeling
and this object is itself. Thus it comes forward here as self-feel¬
ing, or as an actual consciousness existing on its own account.
In this return into self there comes to view its second relation¬
ship, that of desire and work in which consciousness finds con¬
firmation of that inner certainty of itself which we know it has
attained, by overcoming and enjoying the existence alien to it,
viz. existence in the form of independent things. But the Un¬
happy Consciousness merely finds itself desiring and working ; it
is not aware that to find itself active in this way implies that
it is in fact certain of itself, and that its feeling of the alien exist¬
ence is this self-feeling. Since it is not explicitly aware of this
certainty, its inner life really remains a still incomplete self-cer¬
tainty ; that confirmation which it would receive through work
and enjoyment is therefore equally incomplete; in other words,
it must itself set at nought this confirmation so that it may in¬
deed find in it confirmation, but only confirmation of what it
is for itself ’ viz. of its dividedness.

219. The world of actuality to which desire and work are
directed is no longer for this consciousness something intrinsically


FREEDOM OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


*33

null , something merely to be set aside and consumed, but some¬
thing like that consciousness itself, an actuality broken in two ,
which is only from one aspect intrinsically null, but from
another aspect is also a sanctified world; it is the form of the
Unchangeable, for this has retained individuality, and because,
as the Unchangeable, it is a Universal, its individuality has in
general the significance of all actuality.

220. If consciousness were aware of being an independent
consciousness, and the world of actuality were for it an absolute
nullity, then in work and enjoyment it would attain to a feeling
of its independence, since the world of actuality would be nulli¬
fied by itself. But since this actuality is for consciousness the
form of the Unchangeable, it is unable of itself to nullify it. On
the contrary, since it does succeed in setting it at nought and
enjoying it, this comes about through the Unchangeable’s itself
having surrendered its embodied form, and having relinquished it
for the enjoyment of consciousness. Consciousness, on its part,
likewise makes its appearance as an actuality, but also as divided
within itself, and in its work and enjoyment this dividedness
displays itself as breaking up into a relation to the world of actu¬
ality or a being which is for itself \ and into a being that is in
itself. That relation to actuality is the changing of it or working
on it , the being-for-self which belongs to the individual conscious¬
ness as such. But, in this relation, it is also in itself or has intrinsic
being; this aspect belongs to the Unchangeable beyond and
consists of faculties and powers, a gift from an alien source,
which the Unchangeable makes over to consciousness to make
use of.

221. Accordingly, consciousness in its activity is, in the first
instance, a relationship of two extremes. On one side it stands
as actively present, while confronting it is a passive actuality:
the two sides are in relation with one another, but both have
also withdrawn into the Unchangeable and stand fast in them¬
selves. It is, therefore, only a superficial element from each side
that is involved in the moving interplay of their mutual opposi¬
tion. The [passive] extreme of actuality is set aside by the active
extreme; but the actuality, on its side, can only be set aside
because its own unchangeable essence sets it aside, repels itself
from itself, and hands over what is repelled to the active
extreme. The active force appears as the power in which actu-


B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


>34

ality is dissolved; for this very reason, however, the conscious¬
ness to which the intrinsic or essential Being is an ‘other’, regards
this power which it displays in its activity to be the beyond of
itself. Instead, therefore, of returning from its activity back into
itself, and having obtained confirmation of its self-certainty,
consciousness really reflects this activity back into the other
extreme, which is thus exhibited as a pure universal, as the abso¬
lute power from which the activity started in all directions, and
which is the essence both of the self-dividing extremes as they
at first appeared, and of their interchanging relationship itself.

222. The fact that the unchangeable consciousness renounces
and surrenders'll s embodied form, while, on the other hand, the
particular individual consciousness thanks [for the gift], i.e.
denies itself the satisfaction of being conscious of its independence ,
and assigns the essence of its action not to itself but to the
beyond, through these two moments of reciprocal self-surrender
of both parts, consciousness does, of course, gain a sense of its
unity with the Unchangeable. But this unity is at the same time
affected with division, is again broken within itself, and from
it there emerges once more the antithesis of the universal and
the individual. For though consciousness renounces the show of
satisfying its feeling of self, it obtains the actual satisfaction of
it; for it has been desire, work, and enjoyment; as consciousness
it has willed , acted , and enjoyed. Similarly, even its giving of thanks ,
in which it acknowledges the other extreme as the essential
Being and counts itself nothing, is its own act which counter¬
balances the action of the other extreme, and meets the self-
sacrificing beneficence with a like action. If the other extreme
delivers over to consciousness only the surface of its being, yet
consciousness also gives thanks; and in surrendering its own
action, i.e. its essential being, it really does more than the other
which only sheds a superficial element of itself. Thus the entire
movement is reflected not only in the actual desiring, working,
and enjoyment, but even in the very giving of thanks where
the reverse seems to take place, in the extreme of individuality.
Consciousness feels itself therein as this particular individual,
and does not let itself be deceived by its own seeming renuncia¬
tion, for the truth of the matter is that it has not renounced itself.
What has been brought about is only the double reflection into
the two extremes; and the result is the renewed division into


FREEDOM OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


1 35


the opposed consciousness of the Unchangeable , and the con¬
sciousness of willing, performing, and enjoying, and self-
renunciation itself which confronts it; in other words, the con¬
sciousness of independent individuality in general.

223. With this appears the third relationship of the process
of this consciousness, which proceeds from the second as a con¬
sciousness that has truly proved itself to be independent, by its
will and its deed. In the first relationship it was merely the
notion of an actual consciousness, or the inner feeling or heart
which is not yet actual in action and enjoyment; the second
is this actualization as an external action and enjoyment.
Returned from this external activity, however, consciousness
has experienced itself as actual and effective, or knows that it is
in truth in and for itself. But here, now, is where the enemy
is met with in his most characteristic form. In the struggle of
the heart and emotions the individual consciousness is only a
musical abstract moment. In work and enjoyment which make
this unsubstantial existence a reality, it can directly forget itself
and the consciousness of its own particular role in this realization
is cancelled out by the act of thankful acknowledgement. But
this cancelling-out is in truth a return of consciousness into
itself, and, moreover, into itself as the actuality which it knows
to be true.

224. This third relationship in which this true actuality is
one of the terms is the relation of that actuality, as a nothingness,
to the universal Being. The process of this relation we have yet
to consider.

225. To begin with, as regards the contradictory relation in
which consciousness takes its own reality to be immediately a
x nothingness , its actual doing thus becomes a doing of nothing,
its enjoyment a feeling of its wretchedness. Work and enjoyment
thus lose all universal content and significance , for if they had any,
they would have an absolute being of their own. Both withdraw
into their mere particularity, which consciousness is set upon
reducing to nothingness. Consciousness is aware of itself as this
actual individual in the animal functions. These are no longer
performed naturally and without embarrassment, as matters
trifling in themselves which cannot possess any importance or
essential significance for Spirit; instead, since it is in them that
the enemy reveals himself in his characteristic shape, they are


B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


136

rather the object of serious endeavour, and become precisely
matters of the utmost importance. This enemy, however,
renews himself in his defeat, and consciousness, in fixing its
attention on him, far from freeing itself from him, really remains
for ever in contact with him, and for ever sees itself as defiled;
and, since at the same time this object of its efforts, instead of
being something essential, is of the meanest character, instead
of being a universal, is the merest particular, we have here only
a personality confined to its own self and its own petty actions,
a personality brooding over itself, as wretched as it is impo¬
verished.

226. But to both of these moments, the feeling of its wretch¬
edness and the poverty of its actions, is linked the conscious¬
ness of its unity with the Unchangeable. For the attempted
direct destruction of what it actually is is mediated by the thought
of the Unchangeable, and takes place in this relation to it. The
mediated relation constitutes the essence of the negative move¬
ment in which consciousness turns against its particular indivi¬
duality, but which, qua relation , is in itself positive , and will bring
consciousness itself to an awareness of its unity with the Un¬
changeable.

227. This mediated relation is thus a syllogism in which the
individuality, initially fixed in its antithesis to the in-itself is
united with this other extreme only through a third term.
Through this middle term the one extreme, the Unchangeable,
is brought into relation with the unessential consciousness,
which equally is brought into relation with the Unchangeable
only through this middle term; thus this middle term is one
which presents the two extremes to one another, and ministers
to each in its dealings with the other. This middle term is itself
a conscious Being [the mediator], for it is an action which medi¬
ates consciousness as such; the content of this action is the
extinction of its particular individuality which consciousness is
undertaking.

228. In the mediator, then, this consciousness frees itself from
action and enjoyment so far as they are regarded as its own.
As a separate, independent extreme, it rejects the essence of its
will, and casts upon the mediator or minister [priest] its own
freedom of decision, and herewith the responsibility for its own
action. This mediator, having a direct relationship with the un-


FREEDOM OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS 137

changeable Being, ministers by giving advice on what is right.
The action, since it follows upon the decision of someone else,
ceases, as regards the doing or the willing of it, to be its own.
But there is still left to the unessential consciousness the objective
aspect, viz. the fruit of its labour, and its enjoyment. These,
therefore, it rejects as well, and just as it renounces its will, so
it renounces the actuality it received in work and enjoyment.
It renounces them, partly as identified with the truth it has
attained regarding its own self-conscious independence —in¬
asmuch as what it does is foreign to it, a thinking and speaking
of what is meaningless to it; partly, as identified with external
possessions —when it gives away part of what it has acquired
through work; and partly, also, as identified with the
enjoyment it has had—when, in its fastings and mortifications,
it once more completely denies itself that enjoyment.

229. Through these moments of surrender, first of its right
to decide for itself, then of its property and enjoyment, and fin¬
ally through the positive moment of practising what it does not
understand, it truly and completely deprives itself of the con¬
sciousness of inner and outer freedom, of the actuality in which
consciousness exists for itself It has the certainty of having truly
divested itself of its T, and of having turned its immediate self-
consciousness into a Thing , into an objective existence. Only
through this actual sacrifice could it demonstrate this self-
renunciation. For only therein does the deception vanish which
lies in the inner acknowledgement of gratitude through heart,
sendment, and tongue, an acknowledgement which indeed dis¬
claims all power pertaining to its own independent existence,
ascribing it all to a gift from above, but which in this very dis¬
claimer, holds on to its own particular existence, does so out¬
wardly in the possessions it does not surrender, inwardly in the
consciousness of the decision it has itself made, and in the con¬
sciousness of its content which it has itself determined, which
it has not exchanged for one coming from outside, which last
would fill it up with what is meaningless for it.

230. But in the sacrifice actually carried out, consciousness,
having nullified the action as its own doing, has also in principle
obtained relief from its misery. That this relief has been obtained
in principle is, however, the action of the other extreme of the
syllogism, which is the essence possessed of intrinsic being. But


8 B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

that sacrifice made by the unessential extreme was at the same
time not a one-sided action, but contained within itself the
action of the other. For the surrender of one’s own will is only
from one aspect negative; in principle, however, or in itself,
it is at the same time positive, viz. the positing of will as the
will of an ‘other’, and specifically of will, not as a particular,
but as a universal will. This positive meaning of the negatively
posited particular will is taken by this consciousness to be the
will of the other extreme, the will which, precisely because it
is an ‘other’ for consciousness, becomes actual for it, not through
the Unhappy Consciousness itself, but through a Third, the
mediator as counsellor. Hence, for consciousness, its will does
indeed become universal and essential will, but consciousness
itself does not take itself to be this essential will. The surrender
of its own will, as a particular will, is not taken by it to be in
principle the positive aspect of universal will. Similarly, its giv¬
ing up of possessions and enjoyment has only the same negative
meaning, and the universal which thereby comes to be for it,
is not regarded as its own doing. This unity of objectivity and
being-for-self, which lies in the Notion of action, and which
therefore becomes for consciousness essence and object —this
unity is not the principle of its action, and so too it does not
become an object for consciousness , directly and through itself.
Rather, it lets the mediating minister express this certainty, a
certainty which is itself still incomplete, that its misery is only
in principle the reverse, i.e. that its action brings it only in principle
self-satisfaction or blessed enjoyment; that its pitiable action
too is only in principle the reverse, viz. an absolute action; that
in principle, action is only really action when it is the action
of a particular individual. But for itself action and its own actual
doing remain pitiable, its enjoyment remains pain, and the
overcoming of these in a positive sense remains a beyond. But
in this object, in which it finds that its own action and being,
as being that of this particular consciousness, are being and
action in themselves , there has arisen for consciousness the idea
of Reason , of the certainty that, in its particular individuality,
it has being absolutely in itself or is all reality.


C. (AA.) REASON
