V. THE CERTAINTY AND TRUTH OF REASON

231. In grasping the thought that the single individual con¬
sciousness is in itself Absolute Essence, consciousness has
returned into itself. For the Unhappy Consciousness the in-itself
is the beyond of itself. But its movement has resulted in positing
the completely developed single individual, or the single indivi¬
dual that is an actual consciousness, as the negative of itself, viz.
as the objective extreme; in other words, it has successfully
struggled to divest itself of its being-for-self and has turned it
into [mere] being. In this movement it has also become aware
of its unity with this universal, a unity which, for us, no longer
falls outside of it since the superseded single individual is the
universal, and which, since consciousness maintains itself in this
its negativity, is present in consciousness as such as its essence.
Its truth is that which appears in the syllogism whose extremes
appeared as held absolutely asunder, as the middle term which
proclaims to the unchangeable consciousness that the single in¬
dividual has renounced itself, and, to the individual, that the
Unchangeable is for it no longer an extreme, but is reconciled
with it. This middle term is the unity directly aware of both
and connecting them, and is the consciousness of their unity,
which it proclaims to consciousness and thereby to itself, the
consciousness of the certainty of being all truth.

232. Now that self-con$ciousness is Reason, its hitherto nega¬
tive relation to otherness turns round into a positive relation.
Up till now it has been concerned only with its independence
and freedom, concerned to save and maintain itself for itself
at the expense of the world, or of its own actuality, both of which
appeared to it as the negative of its essence. But as Reason,
assured of itself, it is at peace with them, and can endure them;
for it is certain that it is itself reality, or that everything actual
is none other than itself; its thinking is itself directly actuality,
and thus its relationship to the latter is that of idealism. Appre¬
hending itself in this way, it is as if the world had for it only


140


C. (AA.) REASON


now come into being; previously it did not understand the
world; it desired it and worked on it, withdrew from it into
itself and abolished it as an existence on its own account, and
its own self qua consciousness—both as consciousness of the
world as essence and as consciousness of its nothingness. In thus
apprehending itself, after losing the grave of its truth, after the
abolition of its actuality is itself abolished, and after the single¬
ness of consciousness is for it in itself Absolute Essence, it dis¬
covers the world as its new real world, which in its permanence
holds an interest for it which previously lay only in its trans¬
iency; for the existence of the world becomes for self-conscious¬
ness its own truth and presence\ it is certain of experiencing only
itself therein.

233. Reason is the certainty of consciousness that it is all
reality; thus does idealism express its Notion. Just as conscious¬
ness, that comeson the scene as Reason, possesses that certainty
directly in itself, so too does idealism give direct expression to
that certainty: ‘I am I’, in the sense that the T which is an
object for me is the sole object, is all reality and all that is
present. Here, the T that is object for me, is not merely an
empty object in general, as it is for self-consciousness as such,
nor is it, as in free self-consciousness, merely an object that with¬
draws itself from other objects which retain their worth alongside
it; on the contrary, it is for self-consciousness an object such
that any other object whatever is a non-being. But self-conscious¬
ness is all reality, not merely for itself but also in itself only
through becoming this reality, or rather through demonstrating
itself to be such. It demonstrates itself to be this along the path
in which first, in the dialectic movement of‘meaning’, perceiv¬
ing and understanding, otherness as an intrinsic being vanishes.
Then, in the movement through the independence of conscious¬
ness in lordship and bondage, through the conception of free¬
dom, through the liberation that comes from Scepticism and
the struggle for absolute liberation by the consciousness divided
against itself, otherness, in so far as it is only for consciousness ,
vanishes for consciousness itself. There appeared two aspects, one
after the other: one in which the essence or the True had for
consciousness the determinateness of being , the other in which
it had the determinateness of being only for consciousness. But
the two reduced themselves to a single truth, viz. that what is,


CERTAINTY AND TRUTH OF REASON


4 i


or the in-itself, only is in so far as it is for consciousness, and
what is for consciousness is also in itself or has intrinsic being.
The consciousness which is this truth has this path behind it
and has forgotten it, and comes on the scene immediately as
Reason; in other words, this Reason which comes immediately
on the scene appears only as the certainty of that truth. Thus
it merely asserts that it is all reality, but does not itself com¬
prehend this; for it is along that forgotten path that this
immediately expressed assertion is comprehended. And
equally, anyone who has not trodden this path finds this asser¬
tion incomprehensible when he hears it in this pure form—
although he does as a matter of fact make the assertion him¬
self in a concrete shape [i.e. the assertion is implicit in his
behaviour].

234. The idealism that does not demonstrate that path but
starts off with this assertion is therefore, too, a pure assertion
which does not comprehend its own self, nor can it make itself
comprehensible to others. It proclaims an immediate certainty
which is confronted by other immediate certainties, which
have, however, been lost on that same path. With equal right,
therefore, the assertions of these other certainties, too, take their
place alongside the assertion of that certainty. Reason appeals
to the ^//'-consciousness of each and every consciousness: ‘/ am
/, my object and my essence is /’; and no one will deny Reason
this truth. But in basing itself on this appeal, Reason sanctions
the truth of the other certainty, viz. that there is for me an
‘other’; that an other than ‘I’ is object and essence for me, or,
in that I am object and essence to myself, I am only so by draw¬
ing back from the ‘other’ altogether, and taking my place as
an actuality alongside it. Not until Reason comes on the scene
as a reflection from this opposite certainty does its affirmation
about itself present itself not merely as a certainty and an asser¬
tion, but as truth; and not merely alongside other truths but
as the sole truth. Its immediate appearance on the scene is the
abstraction of its actual presence , the essence and the in-itself of
which is the absolute Notion, i.e. the movement which has brought
it into being. Consciousness will determine its relationship to
otherness or its object in various ways, according to the precise
stage it has reached in the development of the World-Spirit into
self-consciousness. How it immediately finds and determines itself


I 42


C. (AA.) REASON


and its object at any time, or the way in which it is for itself
depends on what it has already become , or what it already is
in itself

235. Reason is the certainty of being all reality. This in-itself
or this reality is, however, a universal pure and simple, the pure
abstraction of reality. It is the first positivity in which self-con¬
sciousness is in its own self explicitly for itself and C V is therefore
only the pure essentiality of the existent, or is the simple category.
The category, which formerly had the meaning of being the
essentiality of the existent—and it was undetermined whether of
the existent as such, or of the existent contrasted with conscious¬
ness—is now the essentiality or simple unity of the existent only
as a reality that thinks; in other words, the category means
this, that self-consciousness and being are the same essence, the
same, not through comparison, but in and for themselves. It
is only the one-sided, spurious idealism that lets this unity again
come on the scene as consciousness, on one side, confronted by
an in-itself on the other. But now this category or simple unity
of self-consciousness and being possesses difference in itself for
its essence is just this, to be immediately one and selfsame in
otherness , or in absolute difference. The difference therefore is ,
but is perfectly transparent, and a difference that is at the same
time none. It appears as a plurality of categories. Since idealism
proclaims the simple unity of self-consciousness to be all reality,
and immediately makes it the essence without having grasped it
as the absolutely negative essence—only this has negation,
determinateness, or difference within it—this second assertion
is even more incomprehensible than the first, viz. that in the
category there are differences or species of categories. The asser¬
tion as such, as also the assertion as to any specific number of
species of categories, is a new assertion which, however, itself
implies that we no longer have to accept it as an assertion. For
since the difference originates in the pure ‘I’, in the pure Under¬
standing itself, it is thereby made explicit that the immediacy ,
the making of assertions and [mere] finding of differences, is
here given, and we begin to comprehend. But to pick up the
plurality of categories again in some way or other as a welcome
find, taking them, e.g., from the various judgements, and com¬
placently accepting them so, is in fact to be regarded as an
outrage on Science. Where else should the Understanding be


CERTAINTY AND TRUTH OF REASON


i43


able to demonstrate a necessity, if it is unable to do so in its
own self, which is pure necessity?

236. Now, because, in this way, the pure essentiality of
things, like their difference, belongs to Reason, we can, strictly
speaking, no longer talk of things at.all, i.e. of something which
would be for consciousness merely the negative of itself. For to
say that the many categories are species of the pure category
means that this latter is still their genus or essence , and is not
opposed to them. But ambiguity already attaches to them, since
in their plurality they possess otherness in contrast to the pure
category. In fact, they contradict the pure category by such
plurality, and 4 he pure unity must supersede them in itself,
thereby constituting itself a negative unity of the differences. But,
as negative unity, it excludes from itself both the differences as
such, as well as that first immediate pure unity as such, and is
a singular individual ; a new category which is consciousness as
exclusive, i.e. consciousness for which there is an ‘other’. The
singular individual is the transition of the category from its
Notion to an external reality, the pure schema which is both con¬
sciousness, and, since it is a singular individual and an exclusive
unit, the pointing to an ‘other’. But this ‘other’ of the category is
merely the other first-mentioned categories, viz. pure essentiality
and pure difference ; and in this category, i.e. just in the posited-
ness of the ‘other’, or in this ‘other’ itself, consciousness is
equally itself. Each of these different moments points or refers
to another; but at the same time they do not attain to otherness.
The pure category points to the species , which pass over into
the negative category or singular individual; this latter, how¬
ever, points back to them. It is itself pure consciousness which
is aware in each of them of being always this clear unity with
itself, but a unity which equally is referred to an ‘other’, which
in being, has vanished, and in vanishing also comes into being
again.

237. Here we see pure consciousness posited in a twofold
manner: once as the restless movement to and fro through all
its moments, aware in them of an otherness which is superseded
in the act of grasping it; and again, rather as the tranquil unity
certain of its [own] truth. For this unity that movement is the
‘other’, while for this movement that tranquil unity is the
‘other’; and consciousness and object alternate within these


44


C. (AA.) REASON


reciprocal determinations. Thus on the one hand consciousness
finds itself moving about searching here and there, its object
being the pure in-itself and essence; on the other hand, it knows
itself to be the simple category, and the object is the movement
of the different moments. Consciousness, however, as essence
is this whole process itself, of passing out of itself as simple cate¬
gory into a singular individual, into the object, and of con¬
templating this process in the object, nullifying the object as
distinct [from it], appropriating it as its own, and proclaiming
itself as this certainty of being all reality, of being both itself
and its object.

238. Its first declaration is only this abstract empty phrase
that everything is its own. For the certainty of being all reality
is at first [only] the pure category. This Reason which first
recognizes itself in the object finds expression in the empty
idealism which grasps Reason only as it first comes on the
scene; and fancies that by pointing out this pure ‘mine’ of con¬
sciousness in all being, and by declaring all things to be sensa¬
tions or ideas, it has demonstrated this ‘mine’ of consciousness
to be complete reality. It is bound, therefore, to be at the same
time absolute empiricism, for in order to give filling to the
empty ‘mine’, i.e. to get hold of difference with all its developed
formations, its Reason requires an extraneous impulse, in which
first is to be found the multiplicity of sensations and ideas. This
idealism therefore becomes the same kind of self-contradictory
ambiguity as Scepticism, except that, while this expresses itself
negatively, the former does so positively; but it fails equally
with Scepticism to bring together its contradictory thoughts of
pure consciousness being all reality, while the extraneous
impulse or sensations and ideas are equally reality. Instead of
bringing them together, it shifts from one to the other, and is
caught up in the spurious, i.e. the sensuous, infinite. Since
Reason is all reality in the sense of the abstract ‘mine’, and the
other is for it something indifferent and extraneous, what is
here made explicit is that kind of knowing of an ‘other’ by
Reason, which we met with in the form of‘meaning’, ‘perceiv¬
ing and the Understanding’, which apprehends what is
meant and what is ‘perceived’. Such a knowing is at the same
time pronounced by the very principle of this idealism not to
be a true knowing, for only in the unity of apperception lies


OBSERVING REASON


*45

the truth of knowing. The pure Reason of this idealism, in order
to reach this ‘other 5 which is essential to it, and thus is the in -
itself i but which it does not have within it, is therefore thrown
back by its own self on to that knowing which is not a knowing
of what is true; in this way, it condemns itself of its own know¬
ledge and volition to being an untrue kind of knowing, and can¬
not get away from ‘meaning 5 and ‘perceiving 5 , which for it have
no truth. It is involved in a direct contradiction; it asserts
essence to be a duality of opposed factors, the unity of apperception
and equally a Thing ; whether the Thing is called an extraneous
impulse, or an empirical or. sensuous entity, or the Thing-in-
itself, it still remains in principle the same, i.e. extraneous to
that unity.

239- This idealism is involved in this contradiction because
it asserts the abstract Notion of Reason to be the True; con¬
sequently, reality directly comes to be for it a reality that is
just as much not that of Reason, while Reason is at the same
time supposed to be all reality. This Reason remains a restless
searching and in its very searching declares that the satisfaction
of finding is a sheer impossibility. Actual Reason, however, is
not so inconsistent as that; on the contrary, being at first only
the certainty that it is all reality, it is aware in this Notion that
qua certainty , qua C I\ it is not yet in truth reality, and it is
impelled to raise its certainty to truth and to give filling to the
empty ‘mine 5 .
