A. OBSERVING REASON

240. It is true that we now see this consciousness, for which
Being [Sein] means what is its own [Seinen] , revert to the stand¬
point of‘meaning 5 and ‘perceiving 5 ; but not in the sense that
it is certain of what is merely an ‘other 5 . Previously, its percep¬
tion and experience of various aspects of the Thing were some¬
thing that only happened to consciousness; but here, conscious¬
ness makes its own observations and experiments. ‘Meaning 5 and
‘perceiving 5 , which previously were superseded for us, are now
superseded by and for consciousness itself. Reason sets to work
to know the truth, to find in the form of a Notion that which,
for‘meaning 5 and ‘perceiving 5 , is a Thing; i.e. it seeks to possess
in thinghood the consciousness only of itself. Reason now has,


146 C. (AA.) REASON

therefore, a universal interest in the world, because it is certain
of its presence in the world, or that the world present to it is
rational. It seeks its ‘other’, knowing that therein it possesses
nothing else but itself: it seeks only its own infinitude.

241. While at first it is only dimly aware of its presence in
the actual world, or only knows quite simply that this world
is its own, it strides forward in this belief to a general appropria¬
tion of its own assured possessions, and plants the symbol of
its sovereignty on every height and in every depth. But this
superficial ‘[it is] mine’, is not its ultimate interest; the joy of
this general appropriation finds still in its possessions the alien
‘other’ which abstract Reason does not contain within itself.
Reason is dimly aware of itself as a profounder essence than
the pure ‘I’ is , and must demand that difference, that being,
in its manifold variety, become its very own, that it behold itself
as the actual world and find itself present as an [outer] shape
and Thing. But even if Reason digs into the very entrails of
things and opens every vein in them so that it may gush forth
to meet itself, it will not attain this joy; it must have completed
itself inwardly before it can experience the consummation of
itself.

242. Consciousness observes ; i.e. Reason wants to find and to
have itself as existent object, as an object that is actually and
sensuously present. The consciousness that observes in this way
means, and indeed says, that it wants to learn, not about itself
but, on the contrary, about the essence of things qua things.
That this consciousness means and says this, is implied in the
fact that it is Reason; but Reason as such is not as yet object
for this consciousness. If it knew that Reason is equally the
essence of things and of consciousness itself, and that it is only
in consciousness that Reason can be present in its own proper
shape; it would go down into the depths of its own being, and
seek Reason there rather than in things. If it did find it there,
it would be directed to the actual world outside again, in order
to behold therein Reason’s sensuous expression, but at the same
time to take it essentially as Notion. Reason, as it immediately
comes before us as the certainty of consciousness that it is all
reality, takes its reality in the sense of the immediacy of being ,
and similarly, the unity of the T’ with this objective being in
the sense of an immediate unity , in which it has not yet divided




OBSERVING REASON


i47

and reunited the moments of being and the ‘I’, or which has
not yet discerned them. Reason, therefore, in its observational
activity, approaches things in the belief that it truly apprehends
them as sensuous things opposite to the T; but what it actually
does, contradicts this belief, for it apprehends them intellectually ,
it transforms their sensuous being into Notions , i.e. into just that
kind of being which is at the same time ‘I’, hence transforms
thought into the form of being, or being into the form of
thought; it maintains, in fact, that it is only as Nodons that
things have truth. Consciousness, in this observational activity,
comes to know what things are; but we come to know what con -
sciousness itself is. The outcome of its movement will be that what
consciousness is in itself will become explicit for it.

243- This action of Reason in its observational role we have
to consider in the moments of its movement: how it looks upon
Nature and Spirit, and, lastly, upon the relationship of both
in the form of sensuous being, and how it seeks itself as actuality
in the form of immediate being.

a. Observation of Nature

244. When the unthinking consciousness declares observa¬
tion and experience to be the source of truth, what it says may
well sound as if only tasting, smelling, feeling, hearing, and see¬
ing were involved. It forgets, in the zeal with which it recom¬
mends tasdng, smelling, etc., to say that it has no less essentially
determined the object of this sensuous apprehension, and this
determination is at least as valid for the object as is the sensuous
apprehension. It will also readily admit that its concern is not
wholly and solely with perception, and will not let, e.g., the
perception that this penknife lies alongside this snuff-box, pass
for an observation. What is perceived should at least have the
significance of a universal , not of a sensuous particular.

245. This universal is thus, to begin with, only what remains
identical with itself \ its movement is only the uniform recurrence
of the same action. Consciousness, which thus far finds in the
object only universality , or the abstract f it is mine\ must take upon
itself the movement proper to the object and, since it is not yet
the understanding of the object, must at least be the remem¬
brance of it, which expresses in a universal way what in actu¬
ality is present only as a single item. This superficial raising


, 4 8 C. (AA.) REASON

out of singularity, and the equally superficial form of uni¬
versality into which the sensuous object is merely taken up,
without becoming in its own self a universal, this activity of
describing things, is not as yet a movement in the object itself;
the movement is really only in the describing of the object. The
object, as described, has lost its interest; when one has been
described, then another must be started on, and continually
looked for, in order that the activity of describing shall not come
to an end. If it is no longer easy to find new whole things, then
we must go back to those already found, divide and analyse
them further, and bring to light fresh aspects of thinghood in
them. This restless, insatiable instinct can never run out of
material; to discover a new genus of major importance, or even
a new planet which, although an individual, possesses the
nature of a universal, can be the lot of only a lucky few. But
the line of demarcation of what is distinctive of, say, elephant,
oak, gold, of what \s genus and what species , passes through many
stages into the endless particularization of the chaos of animals
and plants, of rocks, or the metals, earths, etc., that only force
and skill can bring to view. In this realm where the universal
is undetermined, where particularization approximates again
to singleness , and again, here and there, descends to it entirely,
there is opened up an inexhaustible supply of material for
observation and description. But here, at the boundary-line of
the universal where an immense field is opened up for that in¬
stinct, it can have found not an immeasurable wealth, but in¬
stead merely the bounds of Nature and of its own activity. It
can no longer know whether what appears to possess intrinsic
being is not really something contingent. What bears in itself
the impress of a confused or immature feeble structure, barely
developing out of rudimentary indeterminateness, cannot
claim even to be described.

246. While this searching and describing seems to be con¬
cerned only with things, we see that in fact it does not run away
into sense-perception. On the contrary, what enables things to
be intelligently apprehended is more important to it than the
rest of the complex of sensuous properties which, of course, the
thing itself cannot dispense with, but which consciousness can
do without. Through this distinction into what is essential and
what is unessential, the Notion rises above the dispersion of the


OBSERVING REASON


>49


sensuous, and cognition thus makes it clear that it is just as
essentially concerned with its own self as with things. This
duplication of what is essential gives rise to hesitation on the
part of cognition as to whether what is essential and necessary
for cognition is so also in respect of things. On the one hand,
the differentiae enable cognition to distinguish one thing from
another, but, on the other hand, it is not the unessential aspect
of things that has to be known, but that characteristic whereby
the things themselves break loose from the general continuity of
being as such, separate themselves from others, and are explicitly
for themselves. Differentiae are supposed, not merely to have an
essentia connection with cognition, but also to accord with the
essential characteristics of things, and our artificial system is
supposed to accord with Nature’s own system and to express
only this. This follows necessarily from the Notion of Reason;
and the instinct of Reason—for, in this observational activity,
Reason operates only instinctively—has also in its systems
achieved this unity, viz. its objects are themselves so constituted
that they contain in themselves an essentiality or a being-for-
self, and are not merely the accident of a particular moment
or a particular place. The distinguishing marks of animals, e.g.,
are taken from their claws and teeth; for in point of fact it is
not only cognition that thereby distinguishes one animal from
another, but each animal itself separates itself from others
thereby, by means of these weapons it maintains itself in its
independence and in its detachment from the generality. The
plant, on the other hand, does not attain to a being-for-self but
merely touches the boundary-line of individuality. It is at this
boundary, therefore, where there is a show o{ division into sexes,
that plants have been studied and distinguished from one
another. What, however, stands on a still lower level cannot
itself any longer distinguish itself from another, but in being
contrasted with it gets lost. Being that is at rest, and being that
is in a relation, come into conflict with each other; a Thing
in the latter case is something different from what it is in the
former state, whereas the single individual maintains itself in
its relation to something else. What, however, is unable to do
this and, qua chemical object, becomes something else than it is
empirically, confuses cognition, and gives rise to the same con¬
flicting views as to whether it ought to keep to one side or the




>50


C. (AA.) REASON


other, since the thing itself does not remain identical with itself,
and in it the two sides fall apart.

247. In those systems, therefore, which are characterized by
a fixed, general selfsameness, this means that both the cognitive
side and the things themselves remain selfsame. But this expan¬
sion of the self-identical determinatenesses, each of which de¬
scribes the course of its progress unhindered and with scope for
free play, leads of necessity equally to its opposite, to the con¬
fusion of these determinatenesses; for the differentia , the general
c aracteristic, is the unity of opposites, of what is determinate
an what is in itself universal; it must therefore split up into
t is antithesis. If, now, on the one side, the determinateness
gains the ascendancy over the universal in which it has its
essence, on the other side again, this universal equally main¬
tains its control over that determinateness, pushes it to its boun-
ary an there mixes up its distinctions and essentialities.
Ubservation, which kept them properly apart and believed that
in t em it ad something firm and settled, sees principles over-
appmg one another, transitions and confusions developing;
what it at first took to be absolutely separate, it sees combined
with something else, and what it reckoned to be in combination,
t sees apart and separate. So it is that observation which clings

tormentpH Ti" Sdfsameness of being, inevitably sees itself

are the ItS f most S eneral determinations—e.g. of what

rob it J erm ,fl j ° 3n an ma ' or a plant—by instances which

which it haH^ ete ™mation, invalidate the universality to

tion which - n ,T n ’ anc * rec l uce it to an observation and descrip¬
tion which is devoid of thought.

is simple ^ e ^ vat *°. n w hich confines itself in this way to what

universal thus fi H ^ ^ SCaUered Sensuous elements by the

be ZZ what ?,*£’ m ltS ° bject the Confusio " of its principle,

itself in Tt^oppo^rReas 6 th T gh itt ° Wn nature > ^
the inert A** ^ • Reason must therefore move on from

!o oSXTuis , “ e i ™ h hiCh had a , .°f pe™a„e„ 0 c :

site. What are called ^7 ; 12 ' aS re ‘ atlng ,tself t0 its °PP°-
which when exnress A^^’a ^ are P ass ve determinatenesses

reprt„T^eir r^ cli a s P rl; ended ? d » “*

movement which returns back im ^ T?" 5 T mmts of a
reaches the stage of looking for the dL'JnZn JsTsoZ




OBSERVING REASON


>5*

thing which essentially is not for itself, but which passes over
into its opposite, it seeks for the law and the Notion of the deter¬
minateness. True, it seeks for them equally as an actuality in
the form of immediate being , but this will, in fact, vanish for it,
and the aspects of the law become pure moments or abstrac¬
tions, so that the law comes to light in the nature of the Notion,
which has destroyed within itself the indifferent subsistence of
sensuous reality.

249. To the observing consciousness, the truth of the law is
found in experience , in the same way that sensuous being is [an
object] for consciousness; is not in and for itself. But if the law
does not have its truth in the Notion, it is a contingency, not
a necessity, not, in fact, a law. But the fact that it is essentially
in the form of Notion, not only does not conflict with its being
accessible to observation, but rather for that very reason gives
it a necessary existence , and makes it [an object] for observation.
The universal, in the sense of the universality of Reason , is also uni¬
versal in the sense implied in the above Notion, viz. that it is
for consciousness, that it displays itself as something present and
actual. In other words, the Notion displays itself in the form
of thinghood and sensuous being; but it does not on that
account lose its nature, nor relapse into an inert subsistence or
an indifferent succession. What is universally valid is also uni¬
versally effective; what ought to be, in fact also is , and what
only ought to be without [actually] being, has no truth. The
instinct of Reason, for its part, rightly holds firmly to this stand¬
point, and refuses to be led astray by figments of thought which
only ought to be and, as ‘oughts’, are credited with truth,
although they are nowhere met with in experience; or by hypo¬
theses as little as by all the other invisible entities of a perennial
‘ought’. For Reason is just this certainty of possessing reality;
and what is not present for consciousness as something existing
in its own right [Selbstwesen], i.e. what does not appear, is for
consciousness nothing at all.

250. That the truth of a law is essentially reality no doubt
again becomes for that consciousness which remains at the level
of observation an antithesis to the Notion and to what is in¬
trinsically universal; in other words, it does not regard an object
such as its law, as having the nature of Reason, but fancies that
it is something alien. But it contradicts its own belief in the fact




, 52 C. (AA.) REASON

that it does not itself take its universality to mean that every single
sensuous thing must have provided evidence of the law, in order
to enable the truth of the law to be asserted. The assertion that
stones fall when raised above the ground and dropped certainly
does not require us to make this experiment with every stone;
it does perhaps mean that the experiment must have been made
with at least a great number, and from this we can then by anal¬
ogy draw an inference about the rest with the greatest prob¬
ability or with perfect right. But analogy not only does not give
a perfect right, but on account of its nature contradicts itself
so often that the inference to be drawn from analogy itself is
rather that analogy does not permit an inference to be made.
Probability , which is what the result would amount to, loses, in
face of truth , every distinction of lesser and greater probability,
let it be as great as it may, it is nothing as against truth. But
the instinct of Reason does in fact take such laws for truth, an
it is when it does not discern necessity in them that it comes
to make this distinction, and reduces the truth of the matter
itself to the level of probability, in order to indicate the imper¬
fect way in which truth presents itself to the consciousness which
has not yet attained to insight into the pure Notion; for uni¬
versality is present only as a simple immediate universality. But,
at the same time, on account of this universality, the law has
truth for consciousness. That a stone falls, is true for conscious¬
ness because in its heaviness the stone has in and for itself
that essential relation to the earth which is expressed in
falling. Consciousness thus has in experience the being of the
law, but it has, too, the law in the form of a Notion ; and it is
only because of the two aspects together that the law is true
for consciousness. The law is valid as a law because it is mani¬
fested in the world of appearance, and is also in its own self a
Notion. ^

251. Because the law is at the same time in itself a Notion,
the instinct of Reason in this consciousness proceeds to refine
the law and its moments into a Notion; it does this of necessity,
but without knowing that this is what it aims to do. It puts
the law to the test of experiment. The law as it first appears
exhibits itself in an impure form, enveloped in single, sensuous
forms of being, and the Notion constituting its nature is
immersed in empirical material. In its experiments the instinct


OBSERVING REASON


*53

of Reason sets out to find what happens in such and such cir¬
cumstances. The result is that the law seems only to be all the
more immersed in sensuous being. The inner significance of this
investigation is to find the pure conditions of the law; and this
means nothing else (even if the consciousness expressing its
meaning in this way were to think it meant something different)
than to raise the law into the form of Notion, and to free its
moments completely from being tied to a specific being. For
example, negative electricity, which at first comes to be known,
say, as resin-electricity, and positive electricity as glass-elec-
tricity, these, as a result of experiments, lose altogether such
a significance and become purely positive and negative elec¬
tricity, neither of which is any longer attached to a particular
kind of thing; and we can no longer say that there are bodies
which are positively electrical and others which are negatively
electrical. In the same way, the relationship of acid and base
and their reaction constitute a law in which these opposite sides
appear as bodies. But these separated detached things have no
actuality; the power which forces them apart cannot prevent
them from at once entering again into a process, for they are
only this relation. They cannot, like a tooth or a claw, remain
apart on their own and as such be pointed out. This essential
nature of theirs, to pass over immediately into a neutral pro¬
duct, makes their being into a being which is implicitly super¬
seded or universal; and acid and base have truth only as uni -
versals. Therefore, just as glass and resin can just as well be posi¬
tively as negatively electrical, in the same way acid and base
are not tied as properties to this or that actuality ; each thing
is only relatively acid or base: what seems to be an absolute base
or acid gets in the so-called synsomaties 1 the opposite signifi¬
cance in relation to something else.—The result of the experi¬
ments is in this way to cancel the moments or activated sides
as properties of specific things, and to free the predicates from
their subjects. These predicates are found only as universals,
as in truth they are; because of this self-subsistence they get
the name of‘matters’, which are neither bodies nor properties;

1 A term coined by a chemist, Winterl, at the beginning of the nineteenth century.
These synsomaties are combinations formed directly without any intermediary which
would produce and itself undergo change; they are still, in consequence, not strictly
chemical processes.


I54 C. (AA.) REASON

and certainly no one would call oxygen, positive and negative
electricity, heat, etc., bodies.

252. Matter , on the contrary, is not an existent thing , but is
being in the form of a universal , or in the form of a Notion.
Reason which is still instinctive makes this correct distinction,
without being aware that just by testing the law on all sensuous
being, it gets rid of the merely sensuous being of the law, and
when it interprets the moments of the law as ‘matters’, their
essential nature has become for Reason a universal, and as such
is expressed as a non-sensuous thing of sense, as an incorporeal
and yet objective being.

253. We have now to see what turn its result takes for it,
and what new shape its observational activity assumes in con¬
sequence. We find, as the truth of this experimenting conscious¬
ness, pure law, which is freed from sensuous being; we see it as
a Notion which, while present in sensuous being, operates there
independently and unrestrained, and, while immersed in it, is
free of it, and a simple Notion. This which is in truth the result
and essence [of its activity], is now present to this consciousness
itself, but as an object; further, since for it the object is not a
result , and is not connected with the preceding activity, it
presents itself to consciousness as a particular kind of object, and
the relation of consciousness to it appears as another kind of
observation.

254. Such an object, in which the process is present in the
simplicity of the Notion, is the organism. It is this absolute fluidity
in which the determinateness, through which it would be only
for an other , is dissolved. The inorganic thing has determinate¬
ness for its essential nature, and for that reason constitutes the
moments of the Notion in their completeness only together with
another thing, and therefore is lost wheft it enters into the pro¬
cess; in the organic being, on the contrary, every determinate¬
ness through which it is open to an other is controlled by the
organic simple unity. None of them shows itself as essential, as
free to enter into relation with an other, and consequently what
is organic maintains itself in its relation.

255. Th e aspects of law which the instinct of Reason here pro¬
ceeds to observe are, as follows from the above characterization,
in the first instance, organic Nature and inorganic Nature in their
relation to one another. The latter is, for organic Nature, no


OBSERVING REASON


1 55


more than the freedom—a freedom opposed to the simple Notion
of organic Nature—of the loosely connected determinatenesses in
which the individual forms of Nature are dissolved and which,
at the same time, breaking away from their continuity, exist
on their own account. Air, water, earth, zones, and climate are
universal elements of this sort, which constitute the indetermi¬
nate simple essence of [natural] individualities, and in which
these are at the same time reflected into themselves. Neither
the individuality, nor the universal element, is absolutely in and
for itself; on the contrary, though they appear to observation
as free and independent, they behave at the same time as essenti¬
ally connected , but in such a way that their independence and
mutual indifference are the predominant feature, and only in
part become abstractions. Here, then, we have law as the con¬
nection of a [universal] element with the formative process of
the organism which, on the one hand, has the elementary being
over against it, and, on the other hand, exhibits it within its
organic reflection. But laws of this kind: animals belonging to
the air have the nature of birds, those belonging to water have
the nature of fish, animals in northern latitudes have thick,
hairy pelts, and so on—such laws are seen at a glance to display
a poverty which does not do justice to the manifold variety of
organic Nature. Besides the fact that organic Nature in its free¬
dom can divest its forms of these characteristics, and of necessity
everywhere presents exceptions to such laws, or rules as we
might call them, the characterization of the creatures to which
they do apply is so superficial that even the necessity of the laws
cannot be other than superficial, and amounts to no more than
the great influence of environment; and this does not tell us what
does and what does not strictly belong to this influence. Such
relations of organisms to the elements [they live in] cannot
therefore in fact be called laws. For, firstly, the content of such
a relation, as we saw, does not exhaust the range of the organ¬
isms concerned, and secondly, the sides of the relation itself are
mutually indifferent, and express no necessity. In the Notion
of acid lies the Notion of base, just as the Notion of positive elec¬
tricity implies that of negative; but often as we may find a thick,
hairy pelt associated with northern latitudes, or the structure
of a fish associated with water, or that of birds with air, the
Notion of north does not imply the Notion of a thick, hairy pelt,


, 5 6 C. (AA.) REASON

the Notion of sea does not imply the Notion of the structure
offish, or the Notion of air that of the structure of birds. Because
of the freedom of the two sides in relation to each other, there
are also land animals which have the essential characteristics
of a bird, of a fish, and so on. The necessity, just because it
cannot be grasped as an inner necessity of the creature, ceases
to have a sensuous existence, and can no longer be observed
in the world of reality, but has withdrawn from it. Finding thus
no place in the actual creature, it is what is called a teleological
relation, a relation which is external to the related terms, and
therefore really the antithesis of a law. It is a conception com¬
pletely freed from the necessity of Nature, a conception which
leaves that necessity behind and operates spontaneously above
it.

256. If the relation, referred to above, of the organism to the
natural elements does not express its essence, the notion of End,
on the other hand, does contain it. It is true that, for the observ¬
ing consciousness, this Notion is not the organism’s own essence ,
but something falling outside of it, and is then only the above-
mentioned external teleological relation. Yet the organism, as it
has been characterized above, is, in fact, the real End itself;
for since it preserves itself in the relation to an other, it is just
that kind of natural existence in which Nature reflects itself into
the Notion, and the two moments of cause and effect, of active
and passive moments, which were the result of a necessary
separating-out, are brought together into a unity, so that here
something does not appear merely as a result of necessity. But,
because it has returned into itself, the last, or the result, is just
as much the first which initiated the movement, and is to itself
the realized End. The organism does not produce something
but only preserves itself; or, what is produced, is as much
already present as produced.

257. We must examine more closely this determination of
End, both as it is in itself, and as it is for the instinct of Reason,
in order to see how the latter finds itself therein, but does not
recognize itself in what it finds. The notion of End, then, to
which Reason in its role of observer rises, is a Notion of which
it is aware ; but it is also no less present as something actual , and
is not an external relation of the latter, but its essence. This actu¬
ality, which is itself an End, is related purposively to an other:


OBSERVING REASON


1 57


which means that its relation is a contingent one with respect
to what both immediately are; immediately, both are indepen
dent and mutually indifferent. But the essence of their relation
is something different from what they thus appear to be, and
their action has a different meaning from the one sense-percep¬
tion at first finds in it. The necessity in what takes place is
hidden, and shows itself only in the End, but in such a way
that this very End shows that the necessity has also been there
from the beginning. The End, however, shows this priority of
itself in the fact that nothing else issues from the alteration
resulting from the action than what was already there. Or, if
we start from what is first, then this in its End, or in the outcome
of its action, returns only to itself; and through this very fact
it demonstrates itself to be something that has its own self for
its End, and thus, as a prius, has already returned to itself or
is in and for itself. Therefore, what it arrives at through the pro¬
cess of its action is itself \ and in arriving only at itself, it obtains
its feeling of self. We have here, it is true, the distinction between
what it is and what it seeks , but this is merely the show of a
distinction, and consequently it is in its own self a Notion.

258. But this isjust how self-consciousness is constituted; it like¬
wise distinguishes itself from itself without producing any dis¬
tinction. Hence it finds in the observation of organic Nature
nothing else than a being of this kind; it finds itself as a thing,
as a life , but makes a distinction between what it is itself and
what it has found, a distinction, however, which is none. Just
as the instinct of the animal seeks and consumes food, but
thereby brings forth nothing other than itself, so too the instinct
of Reason in its quest finds only Reason itself. The animal
finishes up with the feeling of self. The instinct of Reason, on
the other hand, is at the same time self-consciousness; but
because it is only instinct it is put on one side over against con¬
sciousness, in which it has its antithesis. Its satisfaction is, there¬
fore, shattered by this antithesis; it does indeed find itself, viz.
the End, and likewise this End as a Thing. But firstly, the End
is for that instinct outside of the thing presenting itself as End.
Secondly, this End, qua End, is also objective , and therefore does
not fall within the observing consciousness itself, but in another
intelligence.

259. Examined more closely, this determination of End lies


C. (AA.) REASON


158

just as much in the Notion of the thing, that of being in its own
self an End. That is to say, it preserves itself ; i.e. it is at one
and the same time its nature to conceal the necessity, and to
exhibit it in the form of a contingent relation. For its freedom
or its being-for-self is just this, to treat the necessity [of the rela¬
tion] as of no importance. Thus it presents itself as something
whose Notion falls outside of its being. Similarly, Reason has
of necessity to look on its own Notion as falling outside of it,
hence as a Thing, as something towards which it is indifferent
and which is therefore reciprocally indifferent towards Reason
and its Notion. As instinct, Reason also remains at the level
of [mere] being and a state of indifference , and the Thing express¬
ing the Notion remains for it something other than this Notion,
and the Notion other than the Thing. Thus, for Reason, the
organic thing is in its own self an End only in the sense that
the necessity which presents itself as hidden in the action of the
thing—for this behaves as an indifferent being-for-self—falls
outside of the organism itself. Since, however, the organism as
an End in its own self cannot behave in any other way than
as an organism, the fact that it is an End in itself is also manifest
and present in sensuous fashion, and it is as such that it is
observed. The organism shows itself to be a being that preserves
itself, that returns and has returned into itself. But this observing
consciousness does not recognize in this being the Notion of
End, or that the Notion of End exists just here and in the form
of a Thing, and not elsewhere in some other intelligence. It
makes a distinction between the Notion of End and being-for-
self and self-preservation, a distinction which is none. That it
is in fact no distinction is something of which this consciousness
is not aware; on the contrary, the making of the distinction
appears to it as a contingent act having no essential connection
with what is brought about by that act; and the unity which
links the two together, viz. the said act and the End, falls
asunder for this consciousness.

260. On this view, what belongs to the organism itself is the
action lying in the middle between its first and last stage, so
far as this action bears within it the character of singleness. So
far, however, as the action has the character of universality and
the agent of the action is equated with the outcome of that
action, purposive action as such would not belong to the organ-


OBSERVING REASON


i59


ism. That single action which is only a means comes through
its singleness under the category of an altogether single or con¬
tingent necessity. What an organism does to preserve itself as
an individual or as a genus is, therefore, as regards this imme¬
diate content, quite uncontrolled by any law, for the universal
and the Notion fall outside of it. Accordingly, its activity would
be an empty activity devoid of any content of its own; it would
not be even the activity of a machine, for this has a purpose,
and its activity therefore a specific content. Deserted in this way
by the universal, it would be the activity merely of something
immediate qua immediate , i.e. an activity like that of an acid or
base which is not at the same time reflected into itself; an
activity which could not separate itselffrom its immediate exist¬
ence, nor give up this existence (which gets lost in the relation
to its opposite), and still preserve itself. But the thing whose
activity is under consideration here is posited as a thing that
preserves itself in its relation to its opposite. The activity as such
is nothing but the pure essenceless form of its being-for-self, and
its substance, which is not merely a determinate being but the
universal, or its End, does not fall outside of it. It is an activity
which spontaneously returns into itself, and is not turned back
into itself by anything alien to it.

261. However, this unity of universality and the activity does
not exist for this observing consciousness, because that unity is
essentially the inner movement of the organism and can only
be grasped as Notion; but observation seeks the moments in
the form of being, of enduring being; and because the nature
of what is organically a whole is such that the moments are
not contained in it nor can be found in it in that form, conscious¬
ness converts the antithesis into one that conforms to its point
of view.

262. In this way, the organism appears to the observing con¬
sciousness as a relation of two fixed moments in the form of imme¬
diate being—of an antithesis whose two sides, on the one hand,
appear to be given to it in observation, and on the other hand,
as regards their content, express the antithesis of the organic
Notion of End and actuality; but because the Notion as such
is effaced therein, the antithesis is expressed in an obscure and
superficial way, in which thought has sunk to the level of
picture-thinking. Thus we see the Notion taken to mean


*6o C. (AA.) REASON

roughly the inner , and actuality the outer ; and their relation pro¬
duces the law that the outer is the expression of the inner.

263. When we consider more closely this inner with its oppo¬
site and their relation, we find that, in the first place, the sides
of the law no longer have the same import as in the case of
previous laws, in which they appeared as self-subsistent things,
each as a particular body; nor, in the second place, do we find
that the universal is supposed to have its existence elsewhere,
outside of the two sides. On the contrary, the organic being in its
absolute undividedness is made the foundation, as the content
of inner and outer, and is the same for both. Consequently, the
antithesis is still only a purely formal one, whose real sides have
the same in-itself for their essence; but, at the same time, since
inner and outer are opposite realities, and each is a distinct
being for observation, they each seem to observation to have
a peculiar content of their own. However, this peculiar content,
since it is the same substance or organic unity, can in fact only
be a different form of that substance, of that unity; and this
is implied by the observing consciousness when it says that
the outer is merely the expression of the inner. We have seen in
the Notion of End the same determinations of the relation, viz.
the indifferent independence of the different sides and their
unity in that independence, a unity in which they vanish.

264. We have now to see what shape the being of inner and
outer each has. The inner as such must have an outer being
and a shape, just as much as the outer as such; for it is an object,
or is itself posited in the form of being, and as present for
observation.

265. The organic substance as inner is the simple , unitary soul,
the pure Notion of End or the universal, which in its partition
equally remains a universal fluidity, and therefore appears in
its being as the action or movement of the vanishing actuality;
whereas the outer , opposed to that existent inner, subsists in the
quiescent being of the organism. The law, as the relation of that
inner to this outer, thus expresses its content, once by setting
forth universal moments or simple essentialities , and again by set¬
ting forth the actualized essentiality or shape. Those first simple,
organic properties, to call them such, are Sensibility, Irritability,
and Reproduction. These properties, at least the first two, seem
indeed to refer not to the organism in general, but only to the


OBSERVING REASON


161


animal organism. As a matter of fact the vegetable organism
expresses only the simple Notion of the organism, which does
not develop its moments. Consequently, in regard to those
moments, so far as observation has to take account of them,
we must confine ourselves to the organism which exhibits them
in their developed existence.

266. Now, as regards these moments themselves, they are
directly derived from the notion of ‘end-in-itself’, of a being
whose end is its own self. For Sensibility expresses in general
the simple Notion of organic reflection-into-self, or the uni¬
versal fluidity of this Notion. Irritability, though, expresses
organic elasticity, the capacity of the organism to react at the
same time that it is reflected into itself, the actualization which
is opposed to the initial quiescent being-within-self\ an actualiza¬
tion in which that abstract being-for-self is a bein g-for-another.
Reproduction, however, is the action of this whole introreflected
organism, its activity as in itself an End, or as genus , in which
the individual repels itself from itself, and in the procreative
act reproduces either its organic members or the whole indivi¬
dual. Reproduction, taken in the sense of self-preservation in
general , expresses the formal Notion of the organism, or Sensi¬
bility; but it is, strictly speaking, the real organic Notion or
the whole , which returns into itself, either qua individual by pro¬
ducing single parts of itself, or, qua genus, by bringing forth in¬
dividuals.

267. The other significance of these organic elements, viz.
as outer , is their particular shape , according to which they are
present as [outwardly] actual , but at the same time, universal
parts, or organic systems : Sensibility, let us say, as a nervous
system, Irritability as a muscular system, Reproduction as a
visceral system, for the preservation of the individual and the
species.

268. The laws peculiar to organisms accordingly concern a
relationship of the organic moments in their twofold signifi¬
cance, once as being a part of the organic structure, and again
as being a universal fluid determinateness which pervades all
those systems. Thus, in formulating such a law, a specific sensi¬
bility, e.g., would find its expression, qua moment of the whole
organism, in a specifically formed nervous system, or it would
also be linked up with a specific reproduction of the organic parts


C. (AA.) REASON


162

of the individual or with the propagation of the whole, and so
on. Both aspects of such a law can be observed. The outer , in ac¬
cordance with its Notion is being-for-another\ sensibility, e.g., has
its immediately actualized mode in the system of sensibility; and,
as a universal property , it is in its outer expressions an objective
existence as well. The aspect which is called the inner has its
own outer aspect, which is distinct from what in general is called
the outer.

269. Both aspects of an organic law would thus no doubt be
observable, but not the law connecting them; and observation
is unable to perceive these laws, not because, qua observation , it
is too short-sighted and ought not to proceed empirically but
ought to start from the Idea—for such laws, if they were some¬
thing real, must in fact actually exist and therefore be observ¬
able; but rather because the conception of laws of this kind
proves to have no truth.

270. We found that a law existed when the relation was such
that the universal organic property in an organic system had made
itself into a Thing, and in this Thing had a structured copy
of itself, so that both were the same being, present in the one
case as a universal moment, and in the other, as a Thing. But,
in addition, the aspect of the inner is, on its own account, also
a relationship of several aspects; and we are therefore pre¬
sented, to begin with, with the conception of a law as an inter¬
relationship of the universal organic activities or properties.
Whether such a law is possible must be decided from the nature
of such a property. This, however, as a universal fluid is, on
the one hand, not something restricted like a Thing, keeping
itself to the restricted form which is supposed to constitute its
shape: sensibility extends beyond the nervous system and per¬
meates all the other systems of the organism. On the other hand,
such a property is a universal moment, which is essentially not
divorced or separated from reaction or irritability, and repro¬
duction. For, as reflection-into-self, it eo ipso contains reaction.
Mere reflectedness-into-selfis passivity or a dead being, not sen¬
sibility; just as action—which is the same as reaction—when
not reflected into itself, is not irritability. It is precisely the unity
of reflection in action or reaction, and action or reaction in re¬
flection, that constitutes the organism, a unity which is synony¬
mous with organic reproduction. It follows from this that, in


OBSERVING REASON


163


every mode of the organism’s actuality, there must be present
the same quantity of sensibility—since to begin with we are con¬
sidering the relation of sensibility and irritability to one
another—as of irritability, and that an organic phenomenon
can be apprehended and determined or, if you like, explained,
just as much in terms of the one as of the other. What one person
takes, say, for high sensibility, another may equally well take
for high irritability, and irritability of the same degree. If they
are called factors r, and this word is not to be meaningless, they
are thereby declared to be moments of the Notion; thus the real
object whose essence is constituted by this Notion, contains
them both equally within it, and if the object is character¬
ized according to the one moment as very sensitive, it must
also be stated, according to the other moment, to be just as
irritable.

271. If they are distinguished, as they necessarily are, this
is in accordance with the Notion, and their opposition is qualita¬
tive. But when, apart from this true difference, they are also
posited as they immediately are, and for ordinary thought, as
they might be as aspects of the law, then they appear as quantita¬
tively distinct. Their peculiar qualitative antithesis thus
becomes one of magnitude , and there arise laws of this kind, for
example, that sensibility and irritability stand in an inverse
ratio of their magnitude, so that as the one increases the other
decreases; or better, taking directly the magnitude itself as the
content, as its smallness decreases. Should, however, a specific
content be given to this law, say, that the size of a hole increases ,
the more what it is filled with decreases , then this inverse relation
can equally be changed into a direct relation and expressed in
this way, that the size of the hole increases in direct ratio to the
amount taken away—a tautological proposition, whether
expressed as a direct or an inverse ratio. As so expressed, the
proposition means simply this, that a quantity increases as this
quantity increases. Just as the hole and what fills it and is taken
away are qualitatively opposed, but what is real in them, and
its specific quantity, is one and the same in both, and similarly,
increase of magnitude and decrease of smallness are the same,
and their meaningless antithesis amounts to a tautology: so are
the organic moments alike indivisible in their real content, and
in their magnitude, which is the magnitude of that being; the


6 4


C. (AA.) REASON


one decreases only with the other and increases only with it;
or rather, it is a matter of indifference whether an organic
phenomenon is considered as irritability or as sensibility; this
is so in general and equally when its magnitude is under discus¬
sion. Similarly, it is a matter of indifference whether we speak
of the increase of a hole as an increase of the hole qua emptiness,
or as an increase of the filling removed from it. Or again, a
number, e.g. three , remains the same quantity whether it is taken
positively or negatively, and if I increase the three to four, then
both the positive and the negative have become four; just as
the south pole of a magnet is exactly as strong as its north pole,
or a positive electricity, or an acid, is exactly as strong as its
negative, or the base on which it acts. An organic existence is
just such a magnitude as the said ‘three’, or a magnet, etc. It
is that which is increased or diminished, and when it is increased
both of its factors are increased, just as both poles of the magnet
or both kinds of electricity increase if the potential of a magnet
or of one of the electric currents is raised. That both can vary
just as little in intension and extension, that the one cannot de¬
crease in extension but increase in intension, while the other,
conversely, is supposed to decrease its intension but increase
its extension—this stems from the same notion of an empty anti¬
thesis; the real intension is absolutely as great as the extension,
and vice versa.

272. It is evident that what really happens in formulating
this kind of law is that at the outset irritability and sensibility
constitute the organic antithesis; but this content gets lost sight
of and the antithesis deteriorates into a formal one of quantita¬
tive increase and decrease, or of varying intension and exten¬
sion an antithesis which no longer has anything to do with
the nature of sensibility and irritability, and no longer expresses
it. Hence this empty play of formulating laws is not confined
to organic moments but can be practised everywhere and with
everything, and rests in general on a lack of acquaintance with
the logical nature of these antitheses.

273. Lastly, if instead of sensibility and irritability, repro¬
duction is brought into relation with one or the other of them,
there is no longer even the occasion for making laws of this kind;
for reproduction does not stand in an antithetical relation to
those moments as they do to one another; and since this law-


OBSERVING REASON 165

making is based on such an antithesis, here even the show of
its being practised is absent.

274. The law-making just considered contains the dif¬
ferences of the organism in their significance as moments of its
Notion , and strictly speaking should be an a priori formulation
of the law. But it essentially involves this thought, that those
differences have the significance of being already given, and the
consciousness that merely observes has, moreover, to confine
itself only to their outer existence. The actual organism neces¬
sarily contains such an antithesis as is expressed by its Notion,
and such as can be determined as irritability and sensibility,
as these in turn appear distinct from reproduction. The exter¬
nality in which the moments of the Notion of organism are here
considered is the inner’s own immediate externality, not the outer
which is the outer of the whole organism and its shape ; the inner
in its relation to this is to be considered later on.

275. If, however, the antithesis of the moments is understood
in the way it is present in outer existence, then sensibility, irrit¬
ability, reproduction, sink to the level of common properties,
which are universalities equally indifferent towards one
another as are specific gravity, colour, hardness, etc. In this
sense it may well be observed that the organism is more sensitive
or more irritable, or has a greater reproductive capacity than
another, just as we may observe that the sensibility of one is
different in kind from that of another, that one reacts differently
to a given stimulus than another, e.g. a horse reacts differently
to oats than to hay, and a dog again differently to both, dif¬
ferences as readily observable as that one body is harder than
another, and so on. But these sensuous properties, hardness,
colour, etc., as also the phenomena of response to the stimulus
of oats, of irritable response to loads, or of the number and kind
of young produced, when they are related to one another and
compared among themselves, essentially conflict with any con¬
formity to a law. For what characterizes their sensuous being is
just this, that they exist in complete mutual indifference, and
manifest the freedom of Nature released from the control of the
Notion rather than the unity of a relation, irrationally playing
up and down on the scale of contingent magnitude between
the moments of the Notion, rather than exhibiting these
moments themselves.


,66 C. (AA.) REASON

276. It is the other aspect, where the simple moments of the
Notion of organism are compared with the moments of the outer
structure , that would first furnish the genuine law expressing the
true outer as a copy of the inner. Now, because those simple
moments are pervasive fluid properties, they do not have in the
organic thing such a separate, real expression as what is called
an individual system of the shape. Or, again, if the abstract
Idea of the organism is truly expressed in those three moments,
merely because they are not static and are only moments of
the Notion and of movement, the organism, on the other hand,
as a structured shape, is not exhaustively dealt with in the three
specific systems into which it is analysed by anatomy. In so far
as such systems are supposed to be found actually existing, and
to be authenticated by being so found, it must also be borne
in mind that anatomy presents us not only with three such sys¬
tems but with a good many more. Furthermore, apart from this,
the system of sensibility as a whole must mean something quite
different from what is called the nervous system, the irritable
system something different from the muscular system, the re¬
productive system something different from the intestinal
mechanism of reproduction. In the systems of shape as such, the
organism is apprehended from the abstract aspect of a dead
existence; its moments so taken pertain to anatomy and the
corpse, not to cognition and the living organism. In such parts,
the moments have really ceased to be, for they cease to be pro¬
cesses. Since the being of the organism is essentially a universality
or a reflection-into-self, the being of its totality, like its moments,
cannot consist in an anatomical system; on the contrary, the
actual expression of the whole, and the externalization of its
moments, are really found only as a movement which runs its
course through the various parts of the structure, a movement
in which what is forcibly detached and fixed as an individual
system essentially displays itself as a fluid moment. Con¬
sequently, that actual existence as it is found by anatomy must
not be reckoned as its real being, but only that existence taken
as a process, in which alone even the anatomical parts have
a meaning.

277. We see, then, that the moments of the organic inner,
taken by themselves, are incapable of furnishing the aspects of
a law of being, since in such a law they are asserted of an outer


OBSERVING REASON l6?

existence, are distinguished from one another, and neither
aspect could be equally named in place of the other; further,
that, placed on one side, they do not find in the other side their
realization in a fixed system; for this latter would as little possess
any organic truth [i.e. the truth of organic being] as it would
be the expression of those moments of the [organic] inner. The
essential nature of organic being, since it is in itself the universal,
rather consists in general in its moments being equally universal
in actual existence, i.e. in their being pervasive processes, but
not in giving an image of the universal in an isolated thing.

278. In this way the idea of a law in the case of organic being
is altogether lost. The law wants to grasp and express the anti¬
thesis as inert aspects, and in them the determinateness which
is their relation to one another. The inner, to which the mani¬
fested universality belongs, and the outer , to which belong the
parts of the inert shape, were supposed to constitute the corre¬
sponding aspects of the law, but as thus held apart, they lose
their organic significance; and what lies at the base of the idea
of law is precisely this, that each of its two aspects should have
an independent, indifferent subsistence of its own, the relation
of the aspects being shared between them as a twofold deter¬
minateness corresponding to that relation. The fact is that each
aspect of the organism is in its own self just this: to be a simple
universality in which all determinations are dissolved, and to
be the movement of this process.

2 79 - An insight into the difference between this way of
formulating a law and previous forms will make its nature per¬
fectly clear. If, namely, we look back to the movement of per¬
ceiving and to that of the Understanding, in which the latter
reflects itself into itself, and thereby determines its object,’we
see that the Understanding does not, in that movement, have
before itself in its object the relation of these abstract determina¬
tions of universal and individual, essential and external: it is
itself the transition, which does not become objective to it. Here,
on the contrary, the organic unity, which is just the relation
of those opposites, this relation being a pure transitipn, is itself
the object. This transition in its simplicity is immediately uni¬
versality ; and since this universality explicates the different
moments whose relation is to express the law, its moments are
universal objects of this consciousness, and the law runs, ‘the


68


C. (AA.) REASON

outer is the expression of the inner’. Here, the Understanding
has grasped the thought of the law itself, whereas previously it
only looked for laws generally, and their moments were only
vaguely present to it as a specific content, but not as the
thoughts of the laws. As regards content, the laws obtained here
ought not to be such as are merely a passive taking-up into the
form of universality of simply inert differences, but laws which
directly possess in these differences the unrest of the Notion,
and consequently at the same time possess the necessity of the
relation between the aspects. But just because the object, the
organic unity, directly unites the infinite supersession, or abso¬
lute negation, of being with inert being, and because the
moments are essentially a pure transition , there are no such inert
aspects as are required for the law.

280. In order to obtain such aspects, the Understanding
must keep to the other moment of the organic relationship, viz.
to the reflectedness of organic existence into itself. But this being
is so completely reflected into itself that there is no determinate¬
ness related to something else left over for it. Immediate sensuous
being is immediately one with the determinateness as such, and
therefore expresses a qualitative difference in that being, e.g.
blue as against red, acid as against alkali, and so on. But organic
being that has returned into itself is completely indifferent to¬
wards an other, its existence is a simple universality, and it
denies to observation any lasting sensuous differences or, what
is the same thing, displays its essential determinateness only as
th t flux of inert determinatenesses. Consequently, the way in
which difference, qua inert, expresses itself is just this, that it
is an indifferent difference, i.e. difference as magnitude. In this,
however, the Notion is extinguished and necessity has vanished.
But then the content and filling of this indifferent being, the
flux of sensuous determinations gathered up into an organic de¬
termination, expresses also this, that the content really does not
have that determinateness, viz. that of the immediate property,
and the qualitative element falls solely in [the determination
of] magnitude, as we saw above.

281. Although, then, the objective aspect which is appre¬
hended as an organic determinateness itself contains the Notion
and is thereby distinguished from the object as it presents itself
to the Understanding which, in apprehending the content of


OBSERVING REASON


169

its laws, behaves purely as perception, yet apprehension in the
first case relapses completely into the principle and the manner
of the Understanding that merely perceives. For by so doing,
what is apprehended receives the character of a fixed deter¬
minateness, the form of an immediate property or of an inert
phenomenon; furthermore, it is subsumed under the category
of quantity and the nature of the Notion is suppressed. The
exchange of an object that is merely perceived for one reflected
into itself, of a merely sensuous determinateness for an organic
one, thus loses once more its value and does so by the fact that
the Understanding has not yet put behind it the formulating
of laws.

282. To illustrate this exchange by some examples, we may
find perhaps that something which perception takes to be an
‘animal with strong muscles’ is defined as an ‘animal organism
of high irritability’, or what perception takes to be a ‘condition
of great weakness’ is defined as a ‘condition of high sensibility’,
or, if we prefer it, as an ‘abnormal affection’ and, moreover,
a ‘raising of it to a higher potency’—expressions which translate
sensuous facts into Latin, and a bad Latin at that, instead of
into the Notion. That an animal has strong muscles may also
be expressed by the Understanding by saying that the animal
‘possessesagreat muscular force’—great weakness meaningsimi-
larly a ‘slight force’. Determination in terms of irritability has
this advantage over determination in terms of force, that the
latter expresses indeterminate, but the former determinate, re-
flection-into-self; for the force peculiar to muscle is precisely
irritability; and irritability is a preferable determination to
‘strong muscles’, since, as in ‘force’, reflection-into-self is
already directly implied in it. Similarly, weakness or slight
force, organic passivity , is given determinate expression in terms
of sensibility. But when this sensibility is so taken by itself and
fixed and, in addition, is bound up with quantitative determina¬
tions and, qua greater or less sensibility, is opposed to a greater
or less irritability, each is wholly in the element of sense and
is reduced to the ordinary form of a property; what connects
them is not the Notion but, on the contrary, a quantitative anti¬
thesis, which becomes a difference lacking any thought-con-
tent. Though the indefiniteness of the expressions ‘force’,
‘strength’, and ‘weakness’ was thereby eliminated, there now


i ?o


C. (AA.) REASON


arises the equally futile, vague floundering-about between the
antitheses of higher and lower sensibility and irritability as they
increase and decrease relatively to one another. The determina¬
tions of greater or lesser sensibility or irritability are no less the
unthinking apprehension and expression of a sensuous pheno¬
menon than are the wholly sensuous determinations of strength
and weakness which are devoid of any thought-content. Those
thoughtless expressions have not been replaced by the Notion;
instead, ‘strength 5 and ‘weakness 5 have been given a determina¬
tion which, taken solely by itself, is based on the Notion, which
it has for its content, but loses completely this origin and charac¬
ter. On account of the form of simplicity and immediacy in
which this content is made into the aspect of a law, and because
quantity constitutes the element of difference in such determi¬
nations, the essence of the content, which originally is the
Notion and is posited as such, retains the mode of sense-percep¬
tion, and remains as far removed from being cognized as when
determined in terms of strength and weakness or by immediate
sense-properties.

283. Now, there still remains to be considered, solely on its
own account , what the outer aspect of organic being is, and how
in it the antithesis of its inner and outer is determined; just as
at first the inner of the whole in relation to its own outer was
considered.

284. The outer , considered by itself, is the structured shape in
general, the system of life articulating itself in the element of
being, and at the same time essentially the being for an other
of the organism—objective being in its being-for-self This other
appears, in the first instance, as its outer inorganic nature. If
these two are considered in relation to a law, the inorganic
nature cannot, as we saw above, constitute the aspect of a law
over against the organism, because the latter is at the same time
absolutely for itself, and has a universal and free relation to in¬
organic nature.

285. To define more precisely, however, the relationship of
these two aspects in the organic shape, this shape is, in one
aspect, turned against its inorganic nature, while in the other
it is for itself and reflected into itself. The actual organism is the
middle term which unites the being-for-self of life, with the outer
in general, or with being-in-itself The extreme of being-for-self


OBSERVING REASON I?I

is, however, the inner as an infinite One which takes back into
itself, out of their subsistence and connection with outer Nature,
the moments of shape itself; it is that which, without a content
of its own, gives itselfa content in its shape and appears in shape
as its process. In this extreme where it is a simple negativity or
a Pure singular , the organism possesses its absolute freedom in
virtue of which it is indifferent towards, and secured against,
being-for-other, and the determinateness of the moments of
shape. This freedom is at the same time freedom of the moments
themselves, it is their possibility of appearing as an outer existence,
and of being apprehended as such; and just as, in this freedom,
they are free and indifferent towards this outer existence, so,
too, are they in relation to one another; for the simplicity of this
freedom is being, or is their simple substance. This Notion, or
pure freedom, is one and the same life, no matter how many
and varied its shapes or its being-for-other; it is a matter of in¬
difference to this stream of life what kind of mills its drives. Now,
in the first place it is to be noted that this Notion is not to be
understood here as it was formerly, when we were considering
the properly inner in its form of process, or the development of
its moments, but in its form of a simple inner , which constitutes
the purely universal aspect in contrast to the actual living being,
or as the element in which the existent members of the [organic]
shape have their subsistence. For it is this shape that we are con¬
sidering here, and in it the essence of life is present as the sim¬
plicity of subsistence. In the next place, the being-for-other, or
the determinateness of the actual structured shape, is taken up
into this simple universality which is its essence, a determinate¬
ness which is equally simple, universal, and non-sensuous, and
can only be that which is expressed in number. This determinate¬
ness is the middle term of the shape which links indeterminate
life with the actual life, simple like the former and determinate
like the latter. That which in the former, the inner, would be
expressed numerically, the outer would have to express in accord¬
ance with its mode as a multiform actuality, viz. as its manner
of life, colour, etc., in general, as the entire host of differences
which are developed in the world of appearance.

286. If the two aspects of the organic whole—the one being
the inner, while the other is the outer, in such a way that each
again has in its own self an inner and an outer—are compared


I?2 C. (AA.) REASON

with reference to the inner which each aspect has, then the inner
of the first aspect was the Notion as the unrest of abstraction ;
the second, however, has for its inner a quiescent universality
which also involves a quiescent determinateness, number. If,
therefore, the first inner, because the Notion develops its
moments in it, made a deceptive promise of laws on account
of the show of necessity in the relationship, the second directly
disclaims doing so, since number shows itself to be the determi¬
nation of one aspect of its laws. For number is just that com¬
pletely quiescent, lifeless, and indifferent determinateness in
which all movement and relation is extinguished, and which
has broken the bridge to the living element of instincts, manner
of life, and other aspects of sensuous existence.

287. But to consider the shape of the organism as such, and
the inner, qua inner, merely of the shape, is in fact no longer
to consider organic being. For the two aspects which were sup¬
posed to be related are posited as merely indifferent towards
each other, with the result that the reflection-into-self which
constitutes the essence of the organism is done away with. What
really happens here is that the attempted comparison of inner
and outer is transferred to inorganic Nature. Here the infinite
Notion is only the essence which is concealed within, or falls with¬
out in self-consciousness, and no longer, as in the organism, is
objectively present. This relation of inner and outer has thus
still to be considered in its own proper sphere.

288. In the first place, that inner aspect ofshape as the simple
singularity of an inorganic thing is specific gravity. As a simple
being, it can be observed just as well as the determinateness
of number, of which alone it is capable, or, strictly speaking,
it can be found by comparing observations; and it seems in this
way to give one aspect of the law. Sha-pe, colour, hardness,
toughness, and a countless host of other properties would
together constitute the outer aspect, and would have to give
expression to the determinateness of the inner, viz. number, so
that the one would have its counterpart in the other.

289. Now, because negativity is understood here not as a
movement of the process, but as a unity brought to rest , or as
a simple being-for-self ’ it appears rather as that by which the thing
resists the process and inwardly preserves itself, as indifferent
towards it. But, in virtue of the fact that this simple being-for-


OBSERVING REASON


173


self is a tranquil indifference towards an other, specific gravity
appears as one property alongside others; and with that, all neces¬
sary relation of it to this plurality, in other words, all conformity
to law, ceases. Specific gravity, as this simple inner, does not
have [the moment of] difference within itself ‘ in other words,
the difference it has is only unessential; for it is just its pure sim¬
plicity that effaces all essential distinction. This unessential dif¬
ference, magnitude , must therefore have its counterpart or other
m the other aspect, viz. the plurality of properties, since it is
only through this that it is difference at all. If this plurality itself
is concentrated into the simplicity of the antithesis, and deter¬
mined, say, as cohesion , so that this cohesion is a being-for-self
in otherness (just as specific gravity is a pure being-for-self ), then
this cohesion is in the first place pure determinateness posited
in the Notion in contrast to that other determinateness; and
the way of formulating the law would be that which we con¬
sidered above, in connection with the relation of sensibility to
irritability. In the next place, cohesion, qua Notion of being-for-
self in otherness, is further only the abstraction of the aspect
standing over against specific gravity, and as such has no exist¬
ence. For being-for-self in otherness is the process in which the
inorganic would have to express its being-for-self as a self-pre¬
servation , which would secure it from emerging from the process
as moment of a product. But just this is contrary to its nature,
which has no purpose or universality in it. Its process, rather,
is merely the specific activity in which its being-for-self, i.e. its
specific gravity, is suspended. But this specific activity itself in
which its cohesion would exist in its true Notion, and the specific
quantity of its specific gravity, are Notions completely in¬
different towards each other. If the way in which they react
to each other is left out of account, and attention is confined
to the idea of quantity, we could perhaps think of the determi¬
nation like this, that a greater specific weight, as a more in¬
tensive being-within-self, would resist involvement in the pro¬
cess more than would a smaller specific weight. But, conversely,
the freedom of being-for-self only proves itself in the ease with
which it enters into relation with everything, and preserves itself
in this multiplicity. The said intensity without extension of rela¬
tions is an empty abstraction, for extension constitutes the outer
existence of intension. But the self-preservation of the inorganic


74


C. (AA.) REASON


in its relation falls, as we have noted, outside of its nature, since
the inorganic does not contain within itself the principle of
movement, or, in other words, because its being is not absolute
negativity and Notion.

290. This other aspect of the inorganic, on the other hand,
when considered not as process but as a quiescent being, is ordi¬
nary cohesion, a simple sensuous property standing over against
the liberated moment of otherness which is separated into a
number of mutually indifferent properties and which, like spe¬
cific gravity, is one of these properties. The multiplicity of prop¬
erties together, then, constitutes the other aspect of cohesion.
In this, however, as in the other properties, number is the sole
determinateness, and this not only does not express a relation
between these properties and a transition from one to another,
but is essentially just the absence of any necessary relation and
it represents rather the abolition of all conformity to law; for
it is the expression of a determinateness that is unessential . This
being so, then a series of bodies in which the difference is
expressed as a numerical difference of their specific gravities
by no means runs parallel to a series in which the difference
is that of the other properties, even if, to facilitate the compari¬
son, only one or some of them are taken. For, as a matter of
fact, only the entire bundle of properties could constitute the
otherseries in such a parallel. To bring this into order and bind
it into a whole, observation has at its disposal, on the one hand,
the quantitative determinatenesses of these various properties;
on the other hand, however, their differences are manifest as
qualitative. Now in this heap of properties, what would have
to be characterized as positive or negative and as mutually
cancelling each other—in general, the internal arrangement
and exposition of the formula, which would be a very compli¬
cated matter this would be for the Notion to determine; but
the Notion is excluded by the very manner in which the proper¬
ties are immediately there and taken up. In this [mere] being
[of the properties], none displays the character of a negative
over against the other; on the contrary, one is just as well as
the other is, nor does it indicate in any other way its place in
the arrangement of the whole. In the case of a series which pro¬
gresses with parallel differences—whether the relation is meant
to be one of simultaneous increase on both sides, or of increase


OBSERVING REASON


1 75


only on one and decrease on the other—what is of interest is
only th z final simple expression of this combined whole, which
was supposed to constitute one aspect of the law over against
specific gravity; but this one aspect, as a given result , is precisely
nothing else than what has already been mentioned, viz. a
single property, say, like ordinary cohesion, alongside which
the indifferent others, specific gravity among them, are found,
and each of the others can with equal right, i.e. with equal in¬
correctness, be taken as representative of the entire other side;
the one, like the other, would merely represent [ reprasentieren],
in German, vorstellen , the essential nature, but would not itself
be that essential nature. So that the attempt to find series of
bodies which would run simply parallel to each other and
would express the essential nature of the bodies according to
a law of these two series must be regarded as a conception that
is ignorant of its task and of the means whereby it should be
carried out.

.291. Previously, the connection of inner and outer in the
organic shape, which is supposed to be present to observation,
was straightway transferred to the sphere of the inorganic. The
determination which produced this transfer can now be more
precisely indicated, and resulting therefrom we have still
another form and connection of this relationship. Namely, what
in the case of the inorganic seems to offer the possibility of such
a comparison of inner and outer, in the case of the organism
is altogether absent. The inorganic inner is a simple inner which
presents itself to perception as a property that merely is; its
determinateness is therefore essentially magnitude, and, as a
property that merely is, it appears indifferent towards the outer,
or the various other sensuous properties. But the being-for-self
of the living organism dees not stand on one side in this way
over against its outer; on the contrary, it has in its own self
the principle of otherness. If we define being-for-self as simple ,
self-preserving relation-to-self then its otherness is simple negativity ;
and organic unity is the unity of a self-identical relating-to-self
and pure negativity. This unity is, qua unity, the inwardness
of the organism; this is thereby in itself universal, or it is genus.
But the freedom of the genus, in relation to its actual existence,
is different from the freedom of specific gravity in relation to
shape. That of the latter is a freedom that merely is, in other


i 7 6 C. (AA.) REASON

words, specific gravity as a particular property stands on one
side. But because it is a freedom that merely is, it is also only
a determinateness which essentially belongs to this shape, or
whereby this shape, qua essential being, is something determi¬
nate. The freedom of the genus, however, is a universal freedom
and is indifferent towards this shape or towards its actuality.
The determinateness which attaches to the being-for-self of the in¬
organic as such falls therefore in the case of organic being under
its being-for-self, just as, in the case of the inorganic, it falls only
under the being of the latter. Hence, although determinateness
in the inorganic is at the same time present only as a property ,
yet it acquires the dignity of essential being because, as a simple
negative, it stands over against outer existence which is a being-
for-another; and this simple negative is, in its ultimate single
determinateness, a number. The organic being, however, is a
singular individual, which is itself pure negativity, and there¬
fore destroys within itself the fixed determinateness which
attaches to indijjerent being. In so far, therefore, as it has within
it the moment of indifferent being, and so, too, of number, this
latter can be taken as merely a by-product, but not as the
essence of its vitality.

292. But now, though pure negativity, the principle of the
process, does not fall outside of the organism, which therefore
does not have it in its essence as a determinateness, the single
individual being itself intrinsically universal, yet in the organ¬
ism the moments of this pure individual are not developed and
actual as moments which are themselves abstract or universal. On
the contrary, this their expression appears outside of that uni¬
versality, which falls back into the inwardness of the organism;
and between the actual existence or shape, i.e. the self-develop¬
ing individual, and the organic universal or the genus, there
comes the determinate universal, the species. The concrete exist¬
ence attained by the negativity of the universal or the genus
is only the developed movement of a process which runs its
course in the parts of the [inert] existence of the shape. If the genus,
as a quiescent unitary being, had within it the differentiated
parts, and if, too, its simple negativity as such were at the same
time a movement which ran through parts which were equally
simple and immediately universal in themselves, parts which
here were actual as such moments, then the organic genus


OBSERVING REASON


*77


would be consciousness. But, as it is, the simple determinateness ,
qua determinateness of the species, is present in the genus in
a non-spiritual manner; actuality starts from the genus, or,
what enters into actual existence is not the genus as such, i.e.
in general, not the thought of it. The genus as an actual organ¬
ism is merely represented by a surrogate, by number. This lat¬
ter, number, seems to mark the transition from the genus into
the individual structured shape, and to provide observation
with the two necessary aspects of the latter, one as a simple
determinateness, and the other as a shape whose manifold
nature is fully developed. This number, however, really indi¬
cates the indifference and freedom of the universal and the in¬
dividual in relation to one another; the genus puts the indivi¬
dual at the mercy of the non-essential quantitative difference,
but the individual itself, qua living individual, equally shows
itself to be free. True universality, as we have defined it, is here
only an inner essence ; as determinateness of the species it is a formal
universality, and, over against this, the true universality takes
its stand on the side of the single individual, which is thereby
a living individual, and in virtue of its inner being takes no
account of its determinateness as species. But this individual is not
at the same time a universal individual, i.e. one in which the
universality would have an outer actual existence as well; the
universal individual falls outside of the living organism. This
universal individual, however, as immediately the individual of
natural structured shapes, is not consciousness itself; its exist¬
ence as a single organic living individual must not fall outside of
it if it is to be consciousness.

293. Consequently, we have a syllogism in which one
extreme is the universal life as a universal or as genus, the other
extreme, however, being the same universal as a single individual ,
or as a universal individual; but the middle term is composed
of both: the first seems to fit itself into it as a determinate uni¬
versality or as species , the other, however, as individuality proper
or as a single individual. And since this syllogism pertains
wholly to the aspect of the structured shape, it equally embraces
within its scope what is distinguished as inorganic Nature.

294. Now, since the universal life, qua the simple essence of the
genus , develops from its side the differences of the Notion, and
must exhibit them as a series of simple determinatenesses, this


178 C. (AA.) REASON

series is a system ofdifferences posited as [mutually] indifferent,
or is a numerical series. Whereas previously the organism in the
form of a single individual was set over against this essenceless
difference, which neither expresses nor contains its living
nature; and whereas just the same must be said in respect of
the inorganic, taking it as an existence in which the whole of
its properties are developed: it is now the universal individual
we have to consider, and not merely as free from any systemat¬
ization of the genus, but also as the power controlling the genus.
The genus, which divides itself into species on the basis of the
general determinateness of number, or which may adopt as its
principle of division particular features of its existence, e.g.
shape, colour, etc., while peacefully engaged in this activity,
suffers violence from the universal individual, the Earth , which
as the universal negativity preserves the differences as they exist
within itself—their nature, on account of the substance to which
they belong, being different from the nature of those of the
genus—and in face of the systematization of the genus. This
action of the genus comes to be a quite restricted affair which
it is permitted to carry on only inside those powerful elements,
and which is interrupted, incomplete and curtailed on all sides
by their unchecked violence.

2 95 - I* follows from this that in existence in its structured
shape, observation can encounter Reason only as life in general ,
which, however, in its differentiating process does not actually
possess any rational ordering and arrangement of parts, and
is not an immanently grounded system of shapes. If, in the syl¬
logism of organic structured shapes, the middle term, which
contains the species and its actuality as a single individuality,
had in its own self the extremes of inner universality and of uni¬
versal individuality, then this middle term would have in the
movement of its actuality the expression and the nature of uni¬
versality, and would be a self-systematizing development. It is
thus that consciousness , as the middle term between universal
Spirit and its individuality or sense-consciousness, has for
middle term the system of structured shapes assumed by con¬
sciousness as a self-systematizing whole of the life of Spirit—
the system that we are considering here, and which has its objec¬
tive existence as world-history. But organic Nature has no his¬
tory ; it falls from its universal, from life, directly into the single-


OBSERVING REASON , 79

ness of existence, and the moments of simple determinateness,
and the single organic life united in this actuality, produce the
process of Becoming merely as a contingent movement, in
which each is active in its own part and the whole is preserved;
but this activity is restricted, so far as itself is concerned, merely
to its centre, because the whole is not present in it, and is not
present in it because here it is not qua whole for itself

296. Apart, then, from the fact that Reason, in observing
organic Nature, attains only to a contemplation of itself as uni¬
versal life as such, it comes to see its development and realiza¬
tion merely in the form of systems distinguished quite generally,
whose essential character lies not in the organic as such, but
in the universal individual [the Earth]; and it sees that develop¬
ment and realization among these differences belonging to the
Earth in the form of arrangements which the genus attempts
to achieve.

297. Since, then, the universality of organic life falls, in its actu¬
ality, directly into the extreme of singleness without a genuine
mediation of its own, the thing before the observing Reason
is only something ‘meant 5 ; and if Reason can take an idle inter¬
est in observing this ‘meant 5 thing, it is restricted to the descrip¬
tion and narration of the ‘meanings 5 and fanciful conceits it
finds in Nature. This unspiritual freedom of‘meaning 5 will, it
is true, offer on all sides the beginnings of laws, traces of
necessity, allusions to order and system, ingenious and plausible
connections. But, as regards law and necessity, when observa¬
tion connects the organic with the merely given differences of
the inorganic, the elements, zones, and climates, it does not get
beyond the idea of a‘great influence 5 . So, too, on the other side,
where individuality has the significance, not of the Earth, but
of the oneness immanent in life, and where this, in immediate unity
with the universal, does indeed constitute the genus, the simple
unity of which, however, is just for that reason determined only
as number, and therefore sets free the qualitative manifestation;
here observation cannot do more than to make clever remarks,
indicate interesting connections, and make a friendly approach
to the Notion. But clever remarks are not a knowledge of
necessity, interesting connections go no further than being ‘of
interest 5 , while the interest is still nothing more than a subjec¬
tive opinion about Reason; and the friendliness with which the


,8o C. (AA.) REASON

individual alludes to a Notion is a childlike friendliness which
is childish if it wants to be, or is supposed to be, valid in and
for itself.

b. Observation of self consciousness in its purity and in its relation to
external actuality . Logical and psychological laws

298. Observation of Nature finds the Notion realized in in¬
organic Nature, laws whose moments are things which, at the
same time, have the character of abstractions; but this Notion
is not a simplicity that is reflected into itself. The life of organic
Nature, on the other hand, is only this introreflected simplicity;
the antithesis within it of universal and individual does not
sunder itself in the essence of this life itself. The essence is not
the genus which, in its undifferentiated element, would be self-
sundered and self-moved, and at the same time would be, for
itself, undifferentiated in its antithesis. Observation finds this
free Notion, whose universality contains just as absolutely
within it developed individuality, only in the Notion which
itself exists at Notion, i.e. in self-consciousness.

299. When observation now turns in upon itself and directs
its attention to the Notion existing as free Notion, it finds, to
begin with, the Laws of Thought. This individuality which
Thought is in its own self is the abstract movement of the nega¬
tive, a movement wholly retracted into simplicity; and the
Laws are outside of reality. To say that they have no reality ,
means, in general, nothing else than that they lack truth. They
are indeed, not supposed to be the entire truth, but still formal
truth. But what is purely formal without any reality is a mere
figment of thought, or pure abstraction without that internal
division which would be nothing else but the content.—On the
other hand, however, since they are Laws of pure thought, and
pure thought is intrinsically universal, and therefore a know¬
ledge which immediately contains being, and therein all reality
these Laws are absolute Notions, and are inseparably the essen¬
tial principles both of form and of things. Since immanent self-
moving universality is th e sundered simple Notion, the latter thus
has in itself a content, and one which is all content, only not a
sensuous being. It is a content which is neither in contradiction
with the form nor is separated at all from it; rather, it is essenti-



OBSERVING REASON


181


ally the form itself, for the latter is nothing else but the universal
dividing itself into its pure moments.

300. But the way in which this form or content presents itself
to observation qua observation gives it the character of something
found , something that is given , i.e. a content that merely is. It
becomes a quiescent being of relations, a multitude of detached
necessities which, as in and for themselves a fixed content, are
supposed to have truth in their determinateness , and thus are, in
fact, withdrawn from the form. This absolute truth of fixed
determinatenesses, or of a number of different Laws, con¬
tradicts, however, the unity of self-consciousness, or of thought
and form in general. What is asserted to be a fixed Law that
is in itself constant can only be a moment of the unity which
is reflected into itself, can only appear as a vanishing magni¬
tude. But, torn out of this context of movement in the course
of considering them, and represented separately, it is not con¬
tent that they lack, for they possess a definite content, but rather
form which is their essence. In point of fact, these Laws are
not the truth of thought, not because they are supposed to be
merely formal, and to possess no content, but rather for the
opposite reason, viz. that they are supposed in their deter¬
minateness, or just as a content from which form has been re¬
moved, to rank as something absolute. In their truth, as vanish¬
ing moments in the unity of thought, they would have to be
taken as a knowing, or as a movement of thought, but not as
Laws of being. But observing is not knowing itself, and is ignorant
of it; it converts its own nature into the form of being, i.e. it
grasps its negativity only as laws of knowing. It is sufficient here
to have pointed out the invalidity of the so-called Laws of
Thought from the general nature of the case. The more precise
development belongs to speculative philosophy in which they
show themselves to be what they are in truth, viz. single vanish¬
ing moments whose truth is only the whole movement of
thought, knowing itself.

301. This negative unity of thought is for itself \ or rather it
is being-for-its-own-self the principle of individuality, and in its
actuality is active consciousness. Consequently, the observing con¬
sciousness will, by the nature of the case, be led towards this
as the actuality of those laws. Since this connection is not
explicit for the observing consciousness, it supposes that


82


C. f A A.) REASON


thought, in its Laws, remains over on one side, and that, on
the other side, it obtains another being in what is now an object
for it, viz. the active consciousness, which is for itself in such
a way that it supersedes otherness and, in this intuition of itself

as the negative, has its actuality.

302. A new field thus opens up for observation in the beha¬
viour of consciousness in its actuality. Psychology contains the collec¬
tion of laws in accordance with which Spirit relates itself in vari¬
ous ways to the various modes of its actuality as an otherness
already given. On the one hand, Spirit receives these modes into
itself, conforming to the habits, customs, and way of thinking
already to hand, as being that in which it is an actuality or
an object to itself; and, on the other hand, Spirit knows itself
as spontaneously active in faceofthem, and in singling out from
them something for itself, it follows its own inclinations and
desires, making the object conform to it: in the first case it
behaves negatively towards itself as an individuality; in the
second case, negatively towards itself as a universal being.
According to the first aspect, independence gives to what is
already there merely the form of self-conscious individuality as
such and, as regards the content, remains within the general
actuality already given; according to the second aspect, it gives
the actuality at least a peculiar modification which does not
contradict its essential content, or one even whereby the indivi¬
dual, qua particular actuality with a peculiar content, sets itself
in opposition to the general actuality, an opposition which
becomes wrongdoing or crime when it sets aside that actuality
in a merely individual manner, or when it does this in a general
way and thus for all, putting another world, another right, law,
and customs in place of those already existing.

303. Observational psychology, which in the first instance
records its perceptions of the general modes coming to its notice
in the active consciousness, comes across all sorts of faculties,
inclinations, and passions; and since, while recounting the
details of this collection it cannot help recalling the unity of
self-consciousness, it must at least go so far as to be astonished
that such a contingent medley of heterogeneous beings can be
together in the mind like things in a bag, more especially since
they show themselves to be not dead, inert things but restless
movements.

304. Observation, in recounting these various faculties, is


OBSERVING REASON ,8 3

keeping to the universal aspect; the unity of these manifold
capacities is the opposite aspect to this universality, the actual
individuality. However, to take up again in this way the dis¬
tinctive actual individualities, and to recount that one man has
more inclination for this, another for that, that one has more
intelligence than another, all this is much less interesting even
than enumerating the species of insects, mosses, etc.; for these
give observation the right to take them thus singly and un-
comprehendingly, because they belong essentially to the ele¬
ment of contingent particularization. On the other hand, to
take conscious individuality unintelligently, as a manifestation
that is single and separate, involves a contradiction, since its
essential nature is the universal of Spirit. But, since observation
in apprehending it, endows it with the form of universality, it
finds its law , and seems now to have a rational aim and to be
engaged in a necessary activity.

305. The moments constituting the content of the law are,
on the one hand, the individuality itself, on the other hand,
its universal inorganic nature, viz. the given circumstances, 5
situation, habits, customs, religion, and so on; from these the
specific individuality is to be comprehended. They embrace
specific as well as universal elements, and are at the same time
something given , something which provides material for
observation and which, on the other hand, expresses itself in
the form of individuality.

306. Now, the law of this relation of the two sides would have
to state the kind of effect and influence exerted on the individu¬
ality by these specific circumstances. But this individuality con¬
sists precisely both in being the universal , and hence directly and
unresistingly coalescing with the given universal, the customs,
habits, etc., and becoming conformed to them; and in setting
itself in opposition to them and in fact transforming them; and
again, in behaving towards them in its individuality with com¬
plete indifference, neither letting them exert an influence on it,
nor being active against them. Therefore, what is to have an
influence on the individuality, and what kind of influence it is
to have—which really mean the same thing—depend solely on
the individuality itself; to say that by such and such an influence
this individuality has become this specific individuality means
nothing else than that it has been this all along. Circumstances,


184


C. (AA.) REASON

situation, customs, etc., which on the one hand are shown as
already there , and on the other hand as present in this specific indivi¬
duality, express only the indeterminate nature of the individu¬
ality, which is not the point under consideration. If these cir¬
cumstances, way of thinking, customs, in general the state of
the world, had not been, then of course the individual would
not have become what he is; for all those elements present in
this ‘state of the world’ are this universal substance. The fact,
however, that the state of the world has particularized itself in
this particular individual—and it is such an individual that is
to be comprehended—implies that it must also have particu¬
larized itself on its own account and have operated on an indivi¬
dual in this specific character which it has given itself; only m
this way would it have made itself into this specific individual
that he is. If the constitution which the external world has spon¬
taneously given itself is that which is manifest in the individu¬
ality, the latter would be comprehended from the former. We
should have a double gallery of pictures, one of which would
be the reflection of the other: the one, the gallery of external
circumstances which completely determine and circumscribe
the individual, the other, the same gallery translated into the
form in which those circumstances are present in the conscious
individual: the former the spherical surface, the latter the
centre which represents that surface within it.

307. But the spherical surface, the world of the individual,
has at once an ambiguous meaning: it is the actual state of the
world as it is in and for itself, and it is the world of the indivi¬
dual; it is the latter either in so far as the individual has merely
coalesced with that world, has let it, just as it is, enter into him,
behaving towards it as a merely formal consciousness; or, on
the other hand, it is the world of the individual, in the sense
that the actual world as given has been transformed by the indivi¬
dual. Since, on account of this freedom, the actual world is
capable of having this twofold meaning, the world of the indivi¬
dual is to be comprehended only from the individual himself;
and the influence on the individual of the actual world, conceived
as existing in and for itself, receives through the individual the
absolutely opposite significance, viz. that the individual either
allows free play to the stream of the actual world flowing in upon
it, or else breaks it off and transforms it. The result of this, how-


OBSERVING REASON


185

ever, is that ‘psychological necessity 5 becomes an empty phrase,
so empty that there exists the absolute possibility that what is
supposed to have had this influence could just as well not have
had it.

308. Thus there is no question of a being which would be in
and for itself and was supposed to constitute one aspect, and the
universal aspect at that, of a law. Individuality is what its world
is, the world that is its own. Individuality is itself the cycle of
its action in which it has exhibited itself as an actual world,
and as simply and solely the unity of the world as given and
the world it has made\ a unity whose sides do not fall apart,
as in the conception of psychological law, into a world that in
itself is already given, and an individuality existing on its own
account. Or, if those sides are thus considered each by itself, there
exists no necessity and no law of their connection with one
another.


c. Observation of the relation of self consciousness to its immediate actu¬
ality. Physiognomy and Phrenology

309. Psychological observation discovers no law for the re¬
lation of self-consciousness to actuality, or to the world over
against it; and, through the mutual indifference of both, it is
forced to fall back on the peculiar determinateness of real individu¬
ality which exists in and for itself or contains the antithesis of
being for itself and being in itself effaced within its own absolute
mediation. Individuality has now become the object for
observation, or the object to which observation now turns.

310. The individual exists in and for himself: he is for himself
or is a free activity; but he has also an intrinsic being or has
an original determinate being of his own—a determinateness
which is in principle the same as what psychology thought to
find outside of him. In his own self, therefore, there emerges
the antithesis, this duality of being the movement of conscious¬
ness, and the fixed being of an appearing actuality, an actuality
which in the individual is immediately his own. This being, the
body of the specific individuality, is the latter’s original aspect,
that aspect in the making of which it has not itself played a
part. But since the individual is at the same time only what
he has done, his body is also the expression of himself which


i86 C. (AA.) reason

he has himself produced', it is at the same time a sign, which has
not remained an immediate fact, but something through which
the individual only makes known what he really is, when he
sets his original nature to work.

311. If we consider the moments here before us in relation to
the previous view, we have here a general human shape, or at
least the general character of a climate, a continent, a people,
just as previously we had the same general customs and culture.
In addition, there are the particular circumstances and situa¬
tion within the general sphere of actuality; here this particular
actuality is present as a particular formation of the shape of
the individual. On the other side, just as previously the free
activity of the individual was made explicit, as also the fact
ofhisflwtf actuality in the face of the actuality already given, here
the shape stands for the expression of his own actualization
established by the individual himself, the lineaments and
forms of his spontaneously active being. But the actuality,
both general and particular, which observation previously
found given outside of the individual, is here the actuality of
the individual, his inherited body, and it is precisely in this that
the ‘expression’ originating from his activity appears. From the
psychological point of view, actuality in and for itself and the
specific individuality were supposed to be brought into relation
to one another; here, however, the whole specific individuality
is the object of observation; and each side of the antithesis is
itself the whole. To the outer whole, therefore, belongs not only
the original being , the inherited body, but equally the formation
of the body resulting from the activity of the inner being; the
body is the unity of the unshaped and of the shaped being, and
is the individual’s actuality permeated by his being-for-self.
This whole, which contains within it the specific original fixed
parts and the lineaments arising solely from the activity, is, and
this being is the expression of the inner being, of the individual
posited as consciousness and movement. This inner being is, too,
no longer a formal, spontaneous activity, devoid of content or
indeterminate, an activity whose content and determinateness,
as before was the case, lay in external circumstances; on the
contrary, it is an intrinsically determined original character,
whose form is merely the activity. We have then to consider
here how to determine the relation between these two sides and


OBSERVING REASON ,g 7

what is to be understood by this ‘expression’ of the inner in the
outer.

312. This outer, in the first place, acts only as an organ in
making the inner visible or, in general, a being-for-another;
for the inner, in so far as it is in the organ, is the activity itself.
The speaking mouth, the working hand, and, if you like, the
legs too are the organs of performance and actualization which
have within them the action qua action, or the inner as such.
But the externality which the inner obtains through them is
the action as a reality separated from the individual. Speech
and work are outer expressions in which the individual no
longer keeps and possesses himself within himself, but lets the
inner get completely outside of him, leaving it to the mercy of
something other than himself. For that reason we can say with
equal truth that these expressions express the inner too much,
as that they do so too little: too much, because the inner itself
breaks out in them and there remains no antithesis between
them and it; they give not merely an expression of the inner,
but directly the inner itself; too little, because in speech and
action the inner turns itself into something else, thus putting
itself at the mercy of the element of change, which twists the
spoken word and the accomplished act into meaning something
else than they are in and for themselves, as actions of this par¬
ticular individual. Not only do the results of the actions,
through this externality of the influences of others, lose the
character of being something constant in face of other indivi¬
dualities, but since, in their relationship to the inner which they
contain, they behave as a separated, indifferent externality, they
can, qua inner, through the individual himself, be something other
than they appear to be: either the individual intentionally
makes them appear to be other than what they are in truth;
or else he is too clumsy to give himself the outer aspect he really
wanted, and to establish it so firmly that his work cannot be
misconstrued by others. The action, then, as a completed work,
has the double and opposite meaning of being either the inner
individuality and not its expression, or, qua external, a reality free
from the inner, a reality which is something quite different from
the inner. On account of this ambiguity, we must look around
for the inner as it still is within the individual himself, but in
a visible or external shape. In the organ, however, it is present


!88 C. (AA.) REASON

only as the immediate activity itself, which attains its external-
ization in the deed, which either does, or again does not,
represent the inner. The organ, regarded in the light of this
antithesis, does not therefore provide the expression which is

sought. , . . ,

313. If now the outer shape could express the inner individu¬
ality only in so far as that shape is neither an organ nor an
action, hence only in so far as it is a passive whole, it would
behave as an existent Thing, which passively received the inner
as an alien element into its passive existence, and thereby
became a sign of it—an external contingent expression whose
actual aspect lacked any meaning of its own—a language whose
sounds and sound-combinations are not the real thing itself, but
are linked with it by sheer caprice and are contingent in relation
to it.

314. Such an arbitrary combination of factors that are
external for one another yields no law. Physiognomy, how¬
ever, is supposed to differ from other questionable arts and per¬
nicious studies because it considers specific individuality in the
necessary antithesis of an inner and an outer, of character as a
conscious disposition, and this again as an existent shape, and
the way it relates these factors to each other is the way they
are related by their Notion; hence these factors must constitute
the content of a law. In astrology, palmistry, and similar
sciences, on the other hand, what seems to be related is only
an outer to an outer, something or other to an element alien
to it. This particular constellation at birth, and, when this
external element is brought closer to the body, these particular
lines on the hand, are external factors indicating a longer or
shorter life, and the fate in general of the particular individual.
Being externalities, they are indifferent towards each other, and
lack the necessity for one another that ought to lie in the relation
of an outer to an inner.

315. Admittedly the hand does not seem to be such a very
external factor for fate; it seems rather to be related to it as
something inner. For fate itself is also only the manifestation
of what the particular individuality is in itself as an inner origi¬
nal specific character. Now, to find out what this particular in¬
dividuality is in itself, the palmist, like the physiognomist, takes
a shorter cut than, e.g., Solon, who thought he could only know


OBSERVING REASON


189

this from and after the course of the whole life; he examined
the manifestation, but the former examines the [unexplicated]
in-itself. That the hand, however, must represent the in-itself
of the individuality in respect of its fate is easy to see from the
fact that, next to the organ of speech, it is the hand most of
all by which a man manifests and actualizes himself. It is the
living artificer of his fortune. We may say of the hand that
it is what a man does , for in it, as the active organ of his self-
fulfilment, he is present as the animating soul; and since he
is primarily his own fate, his hand will thus express this in-
itself.

316. F rom this nature of the organ of activity, to be a [passive]
being as well as the action within it, or from the fact that the
in-itself- ness is itself present in it, and has a being for others, we
obtain another view of it than the preceding. Namely, if the
organs in general showed themselves to be incapable of being
taken as expressions of the inner, because in them the action qua
action is present, but the action qua [completed] deed is merely
external, and inner and outer in this way fall apart and are
or can be alien to each other, then the organ must now, in
accordance with its nature, be taken again as also a middle term
of both. This very fact that the action is present in it constitutes
an externality of it, and, moreover, one that is other than the
deed; for the organ remains with and in the individual. Now,
this middle term and unity ofinner and outer is in the first place
itself external too. But then this externality is at the same time
taken up into the inner; as simple externality it stands over
against the dispersed externality, which either is merely a single
deed or condition contingent for the individuality as a whole,
or else, as a total externality, is fate split up into a multiplicity
of deeds and conditions. Thus the simple lines of the hand, the
timbre and compass of the voice as the individual characteristic
of speech—this too again as expressed in writing, where the
hand gives it a more durable existence than the voice does,
especially in the particular style of handwriting—all this is an
expression of the inner, so that, as a simple externality , the expres¬
sion again stands over against the manifold externality of action
and fate, stands in relation to them as an inner. Thus, if at first
the specific nature and innate peculiarity of the individual,
together with what these have become as a result of cultivation


C. (AA.) REASON


19°

and education, are taken as the inner, as the essence of his action
and his fate, then this essence has its appearance and externality
to begin with in his mouth, hand, voice, handwriting, and the
other organs and their permanent characteristics. Thereafter ,
and not till then, does it give itself further outward expression
in its actual existence in the world.

317. Now, because this middle term gives itself the form of
an outer expression, which is at the same time taken back into
the inner, its existence is not restricted to the immediate organ
of the action; the middle term is rather the movement and form
of countenance and figure in general, which take no part in
the action. These lineaments and their movements are, accord¬
ing to this notion, the action which is held back and which
remains in the individual, and as regards the individual’s rela¬
tion to the action really performed, they constitute his own con¬
trol and observation of the action, expression in the sense of a
reflection on the actual expression. The individual is therefore not
dumb as regards his external action, because he is thereby at
once reflected into himself, and gives expression to this reflec-
tedness-into-self. This theoretical action, or the individual’s
speech with himself about the external action, is also percep¬
tible to others, for this speech is itself an expression.

318. In this inner, therefore, which in its expression remains
an inner, there is observed the individual as reflected out of
his actual being; and we have to see what is the significance
of this necessity which is posited in this unity. This reflectedness
is in the first place different from the deed itself and therefore
can be something other than the deed, and can be taken for
something other. We see from a man’s face whether he is in
earnest about what he is saying or doing. Conversely, however,
what is here supposed to be the expression of the inner is at
the same time an expression in the form of immediate being, and
hence is itself degraded to the level of [mere] being, which is
absolutely contingent for the self-conscious being. It is therefore
indeed an expression, but at the same time only in the sense
of a sign , so that the particular way in which the content is
expressed is a matter of complete indifference so far as the con¬
tent itselfis concerned. In this appearance, the inner is no doubt
a visible invisible, but it is not tied to this appearance: it can
be manifested just as well in another way, just as another inner


OBSERVING REASON


I 9 I


can be manifested in the same appearance. Lichtenberg 1 there¬
fore rightly says: ‘Suppose the physiognomist ever did take the
measure of a man, it would only require a courageous resolve
on the part of the man to make himself incomprehensible again
for a thousand years.’

Just as, in the previous relationship, the given circumstances
were a [passive] being from which the individuality took what
it could and wanted, either submitting to or transforming that
being, for which reason it did not contain the necessity and
essential nature of the individuality; so here, the manifest im¬
mediate being of the individuality is one which either expresses
the fact of its being reflected out of its actual existence and its
being within itself, or which is for the individuality merely a
sign indifferent to what is signified, therefore truly signifying
nothing; for the individuality, it is as much its countenance as
its mask which it can lay aside. The individuality permeates
its shape, moves and speaks in it; but this existence in its entirety
equally turns into a being that is indifferent to the will and the
deed. Individuality effaces from it the significance it formerly
had, viz. of being that in which the individuality is reflected
into itself or has its true essence; instead it places its essence
rather in the will and the deed.

319. Individuality gives up that reflectedness-into-self which is
expressed in lines and lineaments , and places its essence in the work
it has done. Herein it contradicts the relationship established by
the instinct of Reason, which is engaged in observing the self-
conscious individuality, ascertaining what its inner and outer are
supposed to be. This point of view leads us to the thought which
really lies at the base of the ‘science’—if one wishes to call it
such—of physiognomy. The antithesis which this observation
encounters has the form of the antithesis of the practical and
the theoretical, both falling within the practical aspect itself—
the antithesis of individuality making itself actual in its ‘doing’
(‘doing’ in its most general sense), and individuality as being
at the same time reflected out of this ‘doing’ into itself and mak¬
ing this its object. Observation accepts this antithesis in the
same inverted relationship which characterizes it in the sphere
of appearance. It regards as the unessential outer the deed itself
and the performance, whether it be that of speech or a more

1 Uber Physiognomik , 2nd edn., Gottingen, 1778, p. 35.


192


C. (AA.) REASON


durable reality; but it is the being-within-self of the individu¬
ality which is for it the essential inner. Of the two aspects possessed
by the practical consciousness, intention and deed (what is
‘meant 5 or intended by the deed and the deed itself), observa¬
tion selects the former as the true inner; the intention is sup¬
posed to have its more or less unessential expression in the deed,
but it has its true expression in the shape of the individuality.
The latter expression is the immediate sensuous presence of the
individual spirit; the inwardness which is supposed to be the
true inner is the particularity of the intention and the singleness
of the being-for-self; both together are the spirit as only ‘meant 5
or intended. What observation has for its objects is thus an exist¬
ence which is only ‘meant 5 , and it looks for laws between such
existences.

320. The formingofopinions prima facie about the presumed
[outward] presence of Spirit is natural or everyday physiog-
nomy, the over-hasty judgement formed at first sight about the
inner nature and character of its outer shape. The object of this
opinion is of such a kind that its essence involves its being in
truth something else than merely sensuous immediate being.
True, it is also just this reflectedness into itself, out of sense,
in sensuous form, and this which is visibly present as visibility
of the invisible, is the object of observation. But just this sen¬
suous immediate presence is the reality of Spirit only for mere
opinion, and observation, in keeping with this aspect, busies
itself with this presumed existence of Spirit, with physiognomy,
andwriting, sound of voice, etc. It connects such existence with
just such a presumed inner. It is not the murderer, the thief, who
is to be recognized, but the capacity to be one. The fixed abstract
quality thereby gets lost in the concrete, infinitely determinate,
character of the particular individual, which now demands more
skilfully contrived delineations than those qualifications are.
Such ingenious delineations certainly say more than the qualifi¬
cation, ‘murderer 5 , ‘thief 5 , or ‘good-natured 5 , ‘unspoiled 5 , and
so on; but they are far from being adequate for their purpose,
which is to express the presumed being or the particular individu¬
ality; as inadequate as the delineations of the bodily shape
which go [no] 1 further than a ‘flat forehead 5 , a ‘long nose 5 , etc.
For the individual shape, like the individual self-consciousness,

1 The sense seems to require a ‘no’ here.


OBSERVING REASON


‘93


is, qua a being that is ‘meant’, inexpressible. The ‘science of
knowing men’, 1 which deals with the supposed human being,
like the ‘science’ of physiognomy which deals with his presumed
reality, and aims at raising the unconscious judging of everyday
physiognomy to the level of knowledge, is therefore something
which lacks both foundation and finality; it can never succeed
in saying what it means because it merely ‘means’ and its con¬
tent is something merely ‘meant’.

321. The laws which this ‘science’ sets out to find are rela¬
tions between these two supposed aspects, and hence can them¬
selves be nothing more than empty subjective opinions. Also,
since the object of this supposed way of knowing, which takes
it upon itself to deal with the reality of Spirit, is just the reflec¬
tion of Spirit out of its sensuous existence back into itself, and
a particular [physical] existence is for Spirit something in¬
different and contingent, this kind of knowing must be directly
aware that the laws it has discovered tell us nothing, that,
strictly speaking, it is idle chatter, or merely the voicing of one's
own opinion (an expression which contains the truth about itself,
viz. that it is one’s own opinion that is put forward, hence not
the matter itself but merely an opinion of one's own). As regards
their content, however, these observations are on a par with
these: ‘It always rains when we have our annual fair,’ says the
dealer; ‘and every time, too,’ says the housewife, ‘when I am
drying my washing’.

322. Lichtenberg, who characterizes physiognomic observa¬
tion in this way, also says this: ‘If anyone said, “You certainly
act like an honest man, but I see from your face that you are
forcing yourself to do so and are a rogue at heart”; without
a doubt, every honest fellow to the end of time, when thus
addressed, will retort with a box on the ear.’ This retort is to
the point, because it refutes the primary assumption of such a
‘science’ of mere subjective opinion, viz. that the reality of a
man is his face, etc. The true being of a man is rather his deed;
in this the individual is actual , and it is the deed that does away
with both aspects of what is [merely] ‘meant’ to be : in the one
aspect where what is ‘meant’ has the form of a corporeal passive

1 This refers to the claims put forward by Lavater, whose work was entitled Physiognomi-
sche Fragmente zur Beforderung der Menschenkenntniss und Menschenliebe , Leipzig, 1775-8
(Baillie’s note).


194


C. (AA.) REASON


being, the individuality, in the deed, exhibits itself rather as
the negative essence, which only is in so far as it supersedes [mere]
being. Then, too, the deed equally does away with the inexpres-
sibility of what is ‘meant 5 , in respect of the self-conscious indivi¬
duality. In such mere opinion the individuality is infinitely de¬
termined and determinable. In the accomplished deed this
spurious infinity is destroyed. The deed is something simply de¬
termined, universal, to be grasped in an abstraction; it is
murder, theft, or a good action, a brave deed, and so on, and
what it is can be said of it. It is this, and its being is not merely
a sign, but the fact itself. It is this, and the individual human
being is what the deed is. In the simplicity of this being , the indivi¬
dual is for others a universal being who really is, and who ceases
to be something only ‘meant 5 . It is true that, in the deed, he
is not explicitly present as Spirit; but when it is a question of
his being qua being , and, on the one hand, the twofold being
of bodily shape and deed are contrasted, each purporting to
be what he actually is, then it is the deed alone that must be
affirmed as his genuine being —not his face or outward appearance,
which is supposed to express what he ‘means 5 by his deeds, or
what anyone might suppose he merely could do. Similarly, on
the other hand, when his performance and his inner possibility ,
capacity or intention are contrasted, it is the former alone which
1S \ e re ^ ar< ^ e< ^ as true actuality, even if he deceives himself
on t e point, and, turning away from his action into himself,
tancies that in this inner self he is something else than what he
is in t e deed. Individuality, when it commits itself to the objec¬
tive element in putting itself into a deed, does of course risk
bein f a ^ tered and perverted. But what settles the character of
the deed is just this: whether the deed is an actual being that
endures, or whether it is merely a fancied performance, that
in itself is nothing at all, and passes away. The analysis of this
eing into intentions and subtleties of that sort, whereby the
tfr man, i.e. his deed, is to be explained away again in terms
of a being that is only ‘meant 5 , just as the individual himself
even may create for himself special intentions concerning his

Qk tUa u^- a must to t * le laziness of mere conjecture.

Should this idle thinking want to set its sterile wisdom to work,
with the aim of denying the doer the character of Reason, and
so 1 using him as to declare that not his deed, but his face and


OBSERVING REASON


*95


lineaments are his real being, then it may expect to get the retort
spoken of above, a retort which demonstrates that the face or
outward appearance is not the individual’s in-itself but, on the
contrary, can be an object for handling.

323. If we look now at the range of relationships as a whole,
in which the self-conscious individuality can be observed to
stand towards its outer aspect, there will be one left which has
still to be made an object for observation. In psychology it is
the external reality of things which is supposed to have its self-
conscious counterpart in Spirit and to make Spirit intelligible.
In physiognomy, on the other hand, Spirit is supposed to be
known in its own outer aspect, as in a being which is the utterance
of Spirit—the visible invisibility of its essence. There remains
the further determination of the aspect of reality, viz. that the
individuality expresses its essence in its immediate, firmly estab¬
lished, and purely existent actuality. This last relation is thus
distinguished from the physiognomic by the fact that this is the
speaking presence of the individual who, in expressing himself
in action , at the same time exhibits himself as inwardly reflecting
and contemplating himself, an expression which is itself a move¬
ment, features in repose which are themselves essentially a
mediated being. In the determination yet to be considered,
however, the outer aspect is lastly a wholly immobile reality
which is not in its own self a speaking sign but, separated from
self-conscious movement, presents itself on its own account and
is a mere Thing.

324. In the first place, in regard to the relation of the inner
to this its outer, it seems clear that that relation must be grasped
as a causal connection , since the relation of one being-in-itself to
another being-in-itself, qua a necessary relation, is a causal con¬
nection.

325. Now, for spiritual individuality to have an effect on the
body it must, qua cause, be itself corporeal. The corporeal ele¬
ment, however, in which it acts as cause is the organ, but the
organ not of action against external reality, but of the internal
action of the self-conscious being operating outwards only
against its own body. It is not at once clear which organs these
can be. If we were thinking only of organs in general, the organ
for work as such would be quite obvious, similarly the organ
of sex, and so on. Organs of that sort, however, are to be


C. (AA.) REASON


196

considered as instruments or parts which Spirit, as one extreme,
possesses as a middle term against the other extreme, which is the
external object. Here, however, is to be understood an organ in
which the self-conscious individual, as an extreme, preserves
himself for himself against his own [corporeal] actuality which
is opposed to him, the individual at the same time not being
turned to the outer world but reflected in his action, and in
which is an organ in which the aspect of being is not a being-
for-another. It is true that in the physiognomic relation the organ
is also considered as an existence reflected into itself and review¬
ing the action; but this being is an objective being, and the
result of the physiognomic observation is this, that self-con¬
sciousness confronts this its actuality as something to which it
is indifferent. This indifference vanishes in the fact that this very
reflectedness-into-self is productive of an effect; thereby that
objective existence receives a necessary relation to it. But to act
on that existence the reflectedness-into-self must itself have a
being, though not, strictly speaking, an objective being, and
as such an organ it must be pointed out.

326. Now, in ordinary life, anger, e.g., as such an internal
action, is located in the liver. Plato 1 even assigns the liver some¬
thing still higher, something which is even regarded by some
as the highest function of all, viz. prophesying, or the gift of
speaking of holy and eternal things in a non-rational manner.
But the movement which the individual has in his liver, heart,
and so on, cannot be regarded as wholly reflected into itself;
rather it is present in such a manner that it has already taken
on a corporeal aspect in him and has an animal existence turn¬
ing outwards to external reality.

327. The nervous system , on the other hand, is the immediate
repose of the organism in its movement. The nerves themselves,
it is true, are again the organs of that consciousness which is
already immersed in its outward-directed activity; brain and
spinal cord, however, may be considered as the immediate pre¬
sence of self-consciousness, a presence which abides within itself,
is not objective and also does not look outwards. In so far as
the moment of being which this organ has is a being-for-another,
i.e. is an outer existence, it is a dead thing and no longer the
presence of self-consciousness. This being-within-itself, however,

1 Timaeus , 71, 72.


OBSERVING REASON


1 97


is by its very nature a fluid system, in which the circles cast
into it immediately dissolve, and in which no lasting distinction
is expressed. Meanwhile, as Spirit itself is not abstractly simple,
but a system of movements in which it differentiates itself into
moments, but in this very differentiation remains free; and as
Spirit articulates its body into a variety of functions, and allots
one particular part for only one function: so too, the fluid being
of its being -within-self can be thought of as articulated into parts.
And it seems that it must be thought of in this way, because
the being of Spirit which, in the brain, is reflected into itself,
is itself again only a middle term between Spirit’s pure essence
and its corporeal articulation, a middle term which therefore
must partake of the nature of both; the corporeal aspect must
therefore also be present in the middle term in the form of imme¬
diate being.

328. The spiritually organic being has at the same time the
necessary aspect of an inert , enduring existence; the former, qua
the extreme of being-for-self, must step back, and have this lat¬
ter as the other extreme over against it, which is then the object
on which the spiritually organic being acts as cause. If now the
brain and spinal cord together constitute that corporeal being-
for-self of Spirit, the skull and vertebral column form the other
extreme to it, an extreme which is separated off, viz. the solid,
inert Thing. When, however, anyone thinks of the proper loca¬
tion of Spirit’s outer existence, it is not the back that comes
to mind but only the head. Therefore, in examining a way of
knowing like the one we are now dealing with, we can be
satisfied with this reason—not a very bad reason in this case—
in order to confine this existence to the skull. Should it occur
to anyone to think of the back as the location of Spirit in so
far as by it, too, knowing and doing are no doubt sometimes
partly driven in and partly driven out , this would be no proof
at all that the spinal cord must be taken as included in the in¬
dwelling seat of Spirit, because this proves too much. For one
may equally recall that there are other popular external ways,
too, for getting at the activity of Spirit in order to stimulate
or inhibit it. The vertebral column is, then, rightly ruled out,
if you like; that the skull alone does not contain the organs of
Spirit is as well ‘explained’ as many another doctrine of‘philo¬
sophy of Nature’. For this was previously excluded from the


C. (AA.) REASON


198

Notion of this relation, and for this reason the skull was taken
for the aspect of outer existence; or, if we are not to be allowed
to recall the Notion of the relation, then certainly experience
teaches that, as it is with the eye qua organ that we see, so it
is not with the skull that we murder, steal, write poetry, etc.
That is the reason why we must also refrain from using the
expression ‘organ’ for that significance of the skull which has still
to be mentioned. For although it is commonly said that reason¬
able men pay attention not to the word but to the thing itself,
yet this does not give us permission to describe a thing in terms
inappropriate to it. For this is at once incompetence and deceit,
to fancy and to pretend that one merely has not the right word ,
and to hide from oneself that really one has failed to get hold
of the thing itself, i.e. the Notion. If one had the Notion, then
one would also have the right word. What has been determined
here in the first instance is only that just as the brain is the living
head, the skull is the caput mortuum.

329. It is in this dead being, then, that the mental processes
and specific functions of the brain would have to display their
outer reality, a reality, however, which is still in the individual
himself. For the relation of those processes and functions to the
skull, which as a dead being does not have Spirit dwelling
within it, there presents itself, in the first instance, the external
mechanical relation established above, so that the organs
proper and these are in the brain— here press the skull out
around, there widen or flatten it, or in whatever other way one
cares to represent this action on it. Being itself a part of the
organism, it must indeed be credited, as in the case of every
bone, with a living spontaneous formative activity so that, from
this point of view, it is rather the skull that on its part presses
on the brain, and fixes its outer boundary; and it is better able
to do this, being the harder. But in that case the same relation
would still obtain in the determination of their reciprocal
activity; for whether the skull is the determining factor or the
factor determined, this would produce no alteration at all in
the causal connection, except that the skull would then be made
the immediate organ of self-consciousness because in it, qua
cause , would be found the aspect of being-for-self. But in point
offact, since being-for-self, as an organic spontaneity, is equally
present in both, any causal connection between them is ruled


OBSERVING REASON


'99

out. This development of the two, however, would be inwardly
connected, and would be an organic pre-established harmony,
which would leave the two interrelated aspects free in respect
of each other, each with its own shape to which the shape of
the other need not correspond; and still more so as regards the
relation between the shape and the quality, just as the shape
of the grape and the taste of the wine are mutually independent.
But since the determination of being-for-self falls on the side of
the brain, but that of existence on the side of the skull, there is
also to be established a causal connection between them within
the organic unity a necessary relation between them as
external for one another, i.e. a relation itself external through
which, therefore, the shape of each would be determined by the
other.

330. However, as regards the determination in which the
organ of self-consciousness would act causally on the opposite
aspect, all sorts of things can be said. For what is in question
is the constitution of a cause which is considered in regard to
its indifferent outer existence, its shape and size, a cause whose
inner beingand being-for-self are to be precisely of a kind which
does not conern the immediate or outer existence. The organic
spontaneous formation of the skull is in the first place indifferent
to any mechanical influence exerted on it, and the relationship
of these two relations, since the former is a relating of itself to
itself, is just this very indefiniteness and unbounded ness.
Furthermore, even if the brain received into itself the dis¬
tinctions ofSpirit as existential distinctions and were a plurality
of internal organs each occupying a different space, it would
be left undetermined whether a spiritual feature would, accord¬
ing as it was originally stronger or weaker, be bound to possess
in the first case a more expanded brain-organ, or in the latter
case a more contracted brain-organ, or even the other way
about. But it is contradictory to Nature for the brain to be such
a plurality of internal organs, for Nature gives the moments
of the Notion an existence of their own, and therefore puts the
fluid simplicity of organic life clearly on one side, and its articu¬
lation and division with its distinctions clearly on the other, so
that in the way they are to be grasped here, they display them¬
selves as particular anatomical things. Similarly with the ques¬
tion whether the development of the brain would enlarge or


200


C. (AA.) REASON

diminish the organ, whether it would make it coarser and
thicker or finer. From the fact that it remains undetermined
how the cause is constituted, it is equally left undetermined how
the effect is produced in the skull, whether it is an enlarging
or a narrowing and falling-in of the latter. When this influence
is defined, as it were, more imposingly as a ‘stimulation’, it is
still undetermined whether this takes place by swelling, like the
effect of a cantharides plaster, or by shrivelling, like the effect
of vinegar. All views of this kind can be supported by plausible
grounds, for the organic relation which just as much plays a
part accommodates one view as readily as another, and is
indifferent to all this cleverness.

331. However, it is not the function of observation to seek
to determine this relation, for in any case it is not the brain,
qua a physical part, which stands on the one side, but the brain
qua the being of the self-conscious individuality. This latter as a
lasting character and spontaneous conscious activity exists for
itself and within itself. Over against this being-for-and-within-
itself stand its actuality and its existence-for-another. The
being-for-and-within-itself is the essence and the subject which
has a being in the brain; this being is subsumed under the subject ,
and gets its value only through its indwelling significance. But
the other aspect of self-conscious individuality, the aspect
of its outer existence, is being qua independent and subject, or
qua a ‘thing’, viz. a bone: the actuality and existence of man is his
skull-bone. This is how the relationship and the two sides of this
relation are understood by the consciousness observing them.

332. Observation has now to deal with the more determinate
relation of these aspects. The skull-bone does have in general
the significance of being the immediate actuality of Spirit. But
the many-sidedness of Spirit gives its existence a corresponding
variety of meanings. What we have to obtain is the specific
meaning of the particular areas into which this existence is
divided; and we have to see how these areas contain an indica¬
tion of that specific meaning.

333 * The skull-bone is not an organ of activity, nor even a
‘speaking’ movement. We neither commit theft, murder, etc.
with the skull-bone, nor does it in the least betray such deeds
by a change of countenance, so that the skull-bone would
become a speaking gesture. Nor has this immediate being the


OBSERVING REASON


201


value even of a sign. Look and gesture, tone of voice, even a
pillar or post erected on a desert island, directly proclaim that
they mean something else than what they simply are at first sight.
They at once profess to be signs, since they have in them a pecu¬
liarity which points to something else, by the fact that it does
not properly belong to them. A variety of ideas may well occur
to us in connection with a skull, like those of Hamlet over
Yorick’s skull; but the skull-bone just by itself is such an in¬
different, natural thing that nothing else is to be directly seen
in it, or fancied about it, than simply the bone itself. It does
indeed remind us of the brain and its specific nature, and of
skulls of a different formation, but not of a conscious movement,
since there is impressed on it neither a look nor a gesture, nor
anything that proclaims itself to have come from a conscious
action; for it is an actuality whose role it is to exhibit another
sort of aspect of the individuality, one that would no longer
be a self-reflected, but a purely immediate being.

334. Further, while the skull-bone does not itself feel, it
seems that perhaps a more specific significance could still be
found for it in the fact that specific feelings, through their prox¬
imity to the skull, might enable us to ascertain what it is that
the skull means to convey; and when a conscious mode of Spirit
has its feeling in a specific area of the skull, the shape of this
part of the skull might perhaps indicate what that mode is, and
what is its special nature. Just as, e.g., some people complain
of feeling a painful tension somewhere in the head when they
are thinking hard, or even when thinking at all, so too could
stealing, committing murder, writing poetry, and so on, each
be accompanied by its own feeling, which besides would neces¬
sarily be localized in its own special place. This area of the brain
which would in this way be more moved and activated would
probably also develop the adjacent area of the skull-bone; or
again this particular area would, from sympathy or consensus,
not be inert, but would enlarge or diminish itself or modify its
shape in some way or other. What, however, makes this hypo¬
thesis improbable is this, that feeling as such is something in¬
determinate, and feeling in the head as the centre might be a
general sympathetic feeling accompanying all forms of suffer¬
ing, so that mixed up with the thief s, murderer’s, poet’s, head-
itching or headache are other feelings which could as little be


202


C. (AA.) REASON


distinguished from one another and also from those we can call
merely bodily feelings, as an illness can be diagnosed from the
symptom of headache, if we restrict its significance merely to
the bodily aspect.

335. In fact, from whatever side we look at the matter, there
is no necessary reciprocal relation at all between them, nor any
direct indication of such a relation. If, all the same, the relation
is still to exist, what remains and is necessary to form it is an
irrational , free, pre-established harmony of the corresponding
determination of the two aspects; for one of the two aspects is
to be a non-spiritual reality, a mere thing.—On the one side,
then, we have a multitude of inert areas of the skull, on the
other, a multitude of mental properties, whose number and
character will depend on the state of psychology. The more
paltry the conception of Spirit, the easier becomes the task from
this side; for partly, the mental properties become fewer, and
partly, they become more detached, rigid, and ossified, and
therefore more akin to characteristics of the bone, and more
comparable with them. But, although the task is made much
easier by the paltry conception of Spirit, yet there still remains
a very great deal to be done on both sides: there remains for
observation the entire contingency of their relation. If the child¬
ren of Israel, who were likened in number to the sands of the
sea-shore, should each take unto himself the grain of sand
which stood for him, the indifference and arbitrariness of such
a procedure would be no more glaring than that which assigns
to every faculty of soul, to every passion, and—what must
equally be considered here—to each nuance of character which
the more refined psychology and ‘knowledge of human nature’
likes to talk about, its particular area of skull and shape of skull-
bone. The skull of a murderer has—not this organ or even
sign but this bump. But this murderer has as well a multitude
of other properties, just as he has other bumps, and along with
the bumps also hollows; one has a choice of bumps and hollows.
And again, his murderous disposition can be related to any
bump or hollow, and this in turn to any mental property; for
the murderer is neither merely this abstraction of a murderer,
nor does he have only one bump and one hollow. The observa¬
tions indulged in on this point must, just for that reason, sound
as sensible as those of the dealer and of the housewife about


OBSERVING REASON


203

rain at the annual fair and on wash-day. Dealer and housewife
might as well make the observation that it always rains when
a particular neighbour goes by, or when they eat roast pork.
Just as rain is indifferent to circumstances like these, so too,
from the standpoint of observation, a particular determinateness
of Spirit is indifferent to a particular formation of the skull. For
of the two objects of this observation, one is a dry, sapless being-
for-itself] an ossified property of Spirit, the other is an equally
sapless being-in-itself ; such an ossified thing as both are is com¬
pletely indifferent to everything else. It is just as much a matter
of indifference to the high bump whether a murderer is in its
vicinity, as it is to the murderer whether flatness is close by him.

336. It is of course undeniable that there remains the possi¬
bility that a bump at some place or other is connected with a
particular property, passion, etc. One can imagine the murderer
with a high bump here at this place on the skull, and the thief
with one there. From this aspect phrenology is capable of still
greater expansion; for in the first instance it seems to confine
itself to connecting a bump with a property in the same indivi¬
dual , that is, the individual possesses both. But natural or every¬
day phrenology—for there mu$t be such a ‘science’ as well as
a natural physiognomy—already goes beyond this restriction.
It not only declares that a cheating fellow has a bump as big
as your fist behind his ear, but also asserts that, not the unfaith¬
ful wife herself, but the other conjugal party, has a bump on
the forehead. Similarly, one can imagine the man who is living
under the same roof as the murderer, or even his neighbour,
or, going further afield, imagine his fellow-citizens, etc. with
high bumps on some part or other of the skull, just as well as
one can imagine the flying cow, that first was caressed by the
crab, that was riding on the donkey, etc. etc. But if possibility
is taken, not in the sense of the possibility of imagining , but in
the sense of inner possibility, or the possibility of the Notion , then
the object is a reality of the kind which is a pure ‘thing’, and
is, and should be, without a significance of this sort, and can
therefore have it only in imagination or picture-thinking.

337. The observer, ignoring the mutual indifference of the
two aspects, may nevertheless set to work to determine their
relations, partly encouraged by the general rational principle
that the outer is the expression of the inner , and partly supported


204 C. (AA.) REASON

by the analogy of the skulls of animals—which indeed may well
have a simpler character than human beings, but of which at
the same time it will be all the harder to say what character
they do have, since it cannot be easy for anyone really to enter
in imagination into the nature of an animal. Should, however,
the observer do so, he will find, in assuring us of the certainty
of the laws he claims to have discovered, an excellent aid in a
distinction which must necessarily occur to us here too. The
being of Spirit cannot in any case be taken as something fixed
and immovable. Man is free; it is admitted that the original
being consists merely of dispositions , about which a man is free
to do much as he wishes, or which require favourable circum¬
stances for their development; i.e. an original being of Spirit is
equally well to be spoken of as a being that does not exist qua
being. Were observations therefore to conflict with what some¬
one happens to maintain is a law, should it happen to be fine
weather at the annual fair or on wash-day—then dealer and
housewife might say that really it ought to rain, and that the ten -
dency to rain is certainly present. So too when observing the skull,
it might be said that this individual really ought to be what,
according to the law, his skull proclaims him to be, and that
he has an original disposition , but one that has not been de¬
veloped : this quality is not present , but it ought to be present. The
‘law’ and the ‘ought’ are based on observation of actual rainfall,
and on the actual significance in the case of this particular
characteristic feature of the skull; but if the reality is not present,
the empty possibility serves equally well. This possibility, i.e. non¬
actuality, of the stated law, and hence the observations conflict¬
ing with the law, inevitably result from the fact that the freedom
of the individual, and the developing circumstances, are in¬
different to being as such [or to what merely zV), indifferent to
being, both as an original inner and as an outer osseous form,
and this also from the fact that the individual can be something
else than he is by inner disposition, and still more than what
he is as a bone.

338. We get then the possibility that this bump or this hollow
on the skull may denote something actual, as well as merely
a disposition, one, moreover, that is so ill-defined as to denote
something that is not actual; we see what happens, as always,
to a bad subterfuge, viz. that it is itself ready to be used against


OBSERVING REASON


205


what it is supposed to support. We see mere subjective imagin¬
ing brought by the very nature of the fact to say—but unthink -
ingly —the opposite of what it affirms; to say that by this particu¬
lar bone something or other is indicated, but equally too, is not
indicated.

339- What such imagining vaguely has in mind in the case
of this subterfuge is the true thought which, in fact, abolishes
that imagining, viz. that being as such is not the truth of Spirit
at all. Just as the disposition is itself an original being , which has
no part in the activity of Spirit, just such a being is the bone
on its side. What merely is, without any spiritual activity is,
for consciousness, a Thing, and, far from being the essence of
consciousness, is rather its opposite; and consciousness is only
actual to itself through the negation and abolition of such a
being. From this point of view it must be regarded as a complete
denial of Reason to pass off a bone as the actual existence of con¬
sciousness; and it is passed off as such when it is regarded as
the outer being of Spirit, for the outer is just that reality which
merely is. It is no use saying that the inner is only being inferred
from the outer, and is something different , nor that the outer is
not the inner itself, but only its expression. For in the relation
of the two to one another the determination of the reality that
thinks itself, and is in the form of thought , does fall on the side
of the inner; but on the side of the outer, falls the determination
of the reality which merely is. When, therefore, a man is told
‘You (your inner being) are this kind of person because your
skull-bone is constituted in such and such a way,’ this means
nothing else than, ‘I regard a bone as your reality ’. To reply to
such a judgement with a box on the ear, as in the case of a
similar judgement in physiognomy mentioned above, at first
takes away from the soft parts their importance and position,
and proves only that these are no true in-itself are not the reality
of Spirit; the retort here would, strictly speaking, have to go
the length of beating in the skull of anyone making such a judge¬
ment, in order to demonstrate in a manner just as palpable as
his wisdom, that for a man, a bone is nothing in itself\ much
less his true reality.

340. The crude instinct of self-conscious Reason will reject
out of hand such a ‘science’ of phrenology—this other obser¬
vational instinct of self-conscious Reason which, having


206


C. (AA.) REASON


attained to a glimpse of the cognitive process, has grasped it
unintelligently in a way that takes the outer to be the expression
of the inner. But the worse the conception, the less sometimes
does it occur to one wherein its badness specifically lies, and
the harder it is to analyse it. For a conception is said to be worse,
the purer and emptier the abstraction which is taken to be its
essence. But the antithesis we are here concerned with has for
its sides the individuality that is conscious of itself, and the
abstraction of externality that has become wholly a Thing —
that inner being of Spirit grasped as a fixed non-spiritual being,
opposed tojust such a being. But Reason, in its role of observer,
having reached thus far, seems also to have reached its peak,
at which point it must abandon itself and do a right-about turn;
for only what is wholly bad is implicitly charged with the imme¬
diate necessity of changing round into its opposite. Just so, it
may be said of the Jewish people that it is precisely because
they stand before the portal of salvation that they are, and have
been, the most reprobate and rejected : what that people should
be in and for it self, this essential nature of its own self, is not
explicitly present to it; on the contrary, it places it beyond itself.
By this alienation it creates for itself the possibility of a higher
existence, ifonly it could take back again into itself its alienated
object, than if it had remained undisturbed within the imme¬
diacy of being—because Spirit is all the greater, the greater the
opposition from which it has returned into itself; but it creates
this opposition for itself by setting aside its immediate unity,
and by alienating its being-for-self. However, if such a con¬
sciousness does not reflect on itself, the intermediate position,
or middle term, which it occupies is an unhappy void, since
what should fill and fulfil it has been turned into a fixed
extreme. Thus it is that this final stage of Reason in its obser¬
vational role is its worst; and that is why its reversal becomes
a necessity.

341. For a survey of the series of relations considered so far
which constitute the content and object of observation shows
that in their first form, i.e. in the observation of the relations
of inorganic Nature, sensuous being is already lost to view; the
moments of the relations present themselves as pure abstrac¬
tions and as simple Notions which should be firmly tied to the
existence of things, an existence, however, which gets lost, so


OBSERVING REASON


207

that the moment demonstrates itself to be a pure movement
and a universal. This free process which is complete within itself
retains the significance of something objective, but now appears
as a unitary being; in the process of the inorganic, this unitary
being is the non-existent inner; but the process existing as a uni¬
tary being is the organism. The unitary being, qua a being-for-
self or negative being, stands in antithesis to the universal,
draws away from it, and remains free for itself, so that the
Notion, being realized only in the element of absolute singleness
and isolation, does not find in organic existence its true expres¬
sion, viz. to be present as a universal , but remains an outer or,
what is the same thing, an inner of organic Nature. The organic
process is only implicitly free, but is not explicitly free for itself;
the being-for-self of its freedom appears in purpose and exists as
another being, as a wisdom that is conscious of itself and is outside
of the process. Reason in the role of observer thus turns to this
wisdom, turns to Spirit, to the Notion existing as a universality,
or to purpose existing as purpose; and henceforth the object
before it is its own essence.

342. It turns its attention at first to its purity [i.e. its abstract
form]; but since Reason qua observer apprehends the object,
which moves among its own distinct moments, as an inert being,
its Laws of Thought become connections of one constant
moment to another constant moment. But the content of these
laws being only moments, these run together into the single unit
of self-consciousness. This new object, similarly taken as an inert
being , is the single , contingent self-consciousness. Observation
stands, therefore, within what it imagines to be Spirit, and
within the contingent relation of conscious reality to a reality
that is not conscious. Spirit alone is in its own self the necessity
of this relation. Observation therefore looks more closely at this
object, and compares its reality which wills and acts with its
reality which ponders and is reflected into itself, a reality which
is itself objective. This outer aspect, although a language of the
individual which he possesses within himself, is at the same
time, qua sign, something indifferent to the content it is sup¬
posed to denote, just as that which posits for itself the sign is
indifferent to it.

343. For this reason, observation finally goes back again
from this inconstant language to the fixed being , and declares,


208


C. (AA.) REASON


in accordance with its Notion, that externality is the outer and
immediate reality of Spirit, not as an organ, and not as a lan¬
guage or a sign, but as a dead Thing. What was ruled out by
the very first observation of inorganic Nature* viz. the idea that
the Notion ought to be present in the form of a Thing, is rein¬
stated by this last form of observation in such a way that it turns
the reality of Spirit itself into a Thing or, expressing it the other
way round, gives to lifeless being the significance of Spirit.
Observation has here reached the point where it openly de¬
clares what our Notion of it was, viz. that the certainty of Reason
seeks its own self as an objective reality. Of course, the intention
here is not to state that Spirit, which is represented by a skull,
is a Thing; there is not meant to be any materialism, as it is
called, in this idea; rather Spirit must be something more and
other than these bones. But to say that Spirit [merely] is, means
nothing else than that it is a Thing. When being as such, or
thinghood, is predicated of Spirit, the true expression of this
is that Spirit is, therefore, the same kind of being that a bone
is. It must therefore be regarded as extremely important that
the true expression has been found for the bare statement about
Spirit that it is. When in other respects it is said of Spirit that
it is, L hat it has being, is a Thing , a single, separate reality, this
is not intended to mean that it is something we can see or take
in our hands or touch, and so on, but that is what is said ; and
what really is said is expressed by saying that the being of Spirit
is a bone.

344 - Now this result has a twofold significance. One is its
true meaning, in so far as it is a completion of the outcome of
t e preceding movement of self-consciousness. The Unhappy
elf-consciousness renounced its independence, and struggled to
make its being-for-self into a Thing. It thereby reverted from self-
consciousness to consciousness, i.e. to the consciousness for which
the object is something which merely is, a Thing; but here, what
is a Thing is self-consciousness; the Thing is, therefore, the unity
of the I and being the category. The object being determined
th is for consciousness, the latter possesses Reason. Conscious¬
ness, as well as self-consciousness, is in itself Reason; but only
that consciousness for which the object is determined as the
category can be said to have Reason. From this, however, we
must still distinguish the knowledge of what Reason is. The


OBSERVING REASON


209

category, which is the immediate unity of being and self , 1 must
pass through both forms, and it is precisely for consciousness
qua observer that the category presents itself in the form of being.
This consciousness, in its result, enunciates as a proposition that
of which it is the unconscious certainty—the proposition that
is implicit in the Notion of Reason. This proposition is the infinite
judgement that the self is a Thing, a judgement that suspends
itself. Through this result, then, the category is further deter¬
mined as being this self-superseding antithesis. The pure cate¬
gory, which is present for consciousness in the form of being or
immediacy , is the object as still unmediated , as merely given , and
consciousness is equally unmediated in its relation to it. The
moment of that infinite judgement is the transition of immediacy
into mediation, or negativity . The given object is consequently
determined as a negative object; consciousness, however, is de¬
termined as ^//'-consciousness over against it; in other words,
the category which, in the course of observation, has run
through the form of being is now posited in the form of being-
for-self: consciousness no longer aims to find itself immediately ,
but to produce itself by its own activity. It is itself the End at
which its action aims, whereas in its role of observer it was con¬
cerned only with things.

345. The other significance of the result is the one already
considered, viz. the significance of an observational activity
that dispenses with the Notion. This knows no other way of
understanding and expressing itself than naively asserting the
reality of self-consciousness to lie in the bone just as it exists as
a sensuous thirg, and which at the same time does not lose its
objectivity for consciousness. It has no clear consciousness, how¬
ever, of what is implied in its assertion, and does not grasp the
specific character of the subject and predicate, and their rela¬
tion in its proposition, still less in the sense of the infinite, self-
suspending judgement and of the Notion. Rather, out of a pro¬
founder self-consciousness of Spirit, which here appears as a
natural honesty, it conceals from itself the disgracefulness of the
irrational, crude thought which takes a bone for the reality of
self-consciousness; and it whitewashes that thought by unthink¬
ingly mixing up with it all sorts of relationships of cause and
effect, of‘sign’, ‘organ’, etc. which are meaningless here, and

1 Einhcit des Seins und des Seinen.


210


C. (AA.) REASON

it hides the crudity of the proposition by distinctions derived
from them.

346. Brain fibres and the like, when regarded as the being
of Spirit, are no more than a merely hypothetical reality exist¬
ing only in one’s head, not the true reality which has an outer
existence, and which can be felt and seen; when they exist out
there , when they are seen, they are dead objects, and then no
longer pass for the being of Spirit. But objectivity proper must
be an immediate , sensuous objectivity, so that in this dead objec¬
tivity—for the bone is a dead thing, so far as what is dead is
present in the living being itself—Spirit is explicitly present as
actual. The Notion underlying this idea is that Reason takes
itself to be all thinghood , even purely objective thinghood itself; but
it is this only in the Notion , or, only the Notion is the truth of
this idea; and the purer the Notion itself is, the sillier an idea
it becomes when its content is in the form, not of the Notion,
but of picture-thinking, i.e. if the self-suspending judgement is
not taken with the consciousness of this its infinitude, but as
a fixed proposition the subject and predicate of which are valid
each on its own account, the self fixed as self, the thing fixed
as thing, and yet each is supposed to be the other. Reason, essen¬
tially the Notion, is directly sundered into itself and its opposite,
an antithesis which for that very reason is equally immediately
resolved. But when Reason is presented as its own self and its
opposite, and is held fast in the entirely separate moment of
this asunderness, it is apprehended irrationally; and the purer
the moments of this asunderness, the cruder is the appearance
of this content which is either only for consciousness, or only
ingenuously expressed by it. The depth which Spirit brings forth
from within—but only as far as its picture-thinking conscious¬
ness where it lets it remain—and the ignorance of this conscious¬
ness about what it really is saying, are the same conjunction of
the high and the low which, in the living being, Nature naively
expresses when it combines the organ of its highest fulfilment,
the organ of generation, with the organ of urination. The in¬
finite judgement, qua infinite, would be the fulfilment of life
that comprehends itself; the consciousness of the infinite judge¬
ment that remains at the level of picture-thinking behaves as
urination. 1

1 Cf. Philosophy of Nature , p. 404 (Miller’s translation): ‘In many animals the organs


ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS 211
