B. THE ACTUALIZATION OF RATIONAL SELF-
CONSCIOUSNESS THROUGH ITS OWN ACTIVITY

347. Self-consciousness found the Thing to be like itself, and
itself to be like a Thing; i.e. it is aware that it is in itself the
objectively real world. It is no longer the immediate certainty
of being all reality, but a certainty for which the immediate
in general has the form of something superseded, so that the
objectivity of the immediate still has only the value of something
superficial, its inner being and essence being self-consciousness
itself. The object, to which it is positively related, is therefore
a self-consciousness. It is in the form of thinghood, i.e. it is inde¬
pendent.; but it is certain that this independent object is for it
not something alien, and thus it knows that it is in principle recog¬
nized by the object. It is Spirit which, in the duplication of its
self-consciousness and in the independence of both, has the cer¬
tainty of its unity with itself. This certainty has now to be raised
to the level of truth; what holds good for it in principle , and in
its inner certainty, has to enter into its consciousness and
become explicit for it.

348. What the general stages of this actualization will be is
readily apparent in a general way from a comparison with the
path hitherto followed. Just as Reason, in the role of observer,
repeated, in the element of the category, the movement o{con¬
sciousness, viz. sense-certainty, perception, and the Understand¬
ing, so will Reason again run through the double movement
of self-consciousness, and pass over from independence into its
freedom. To begin with, this active Reason is aware of itself
merely as an individual and as such must demand and produce
its reality in an ‘other’. Then, however, its consciousness having
raised itself into universality, it becomes universal Reason, and
is conscious of itself as Reason, as a consciousness that is already
recognized in and for itself, which in its pure consciousness
unites all self-consciousness. It is the simple, spiritual essence
which, in attaining consciousness, is at the same time real Sub¬
stance , into which the earlier forms return as into their ground,


of excretion and the genitals, the highest and lowest parts in the animal organization,
are intimately connected: just as speech and kissing, on the one hand, and eating, drink¬
ing and spitting, on the other, are all done with the mouth.’



212


C. (AA.) REASON

so that, in comparison with the latter, they are merely particu¬
lar moments of its Becoming, moments which do indeed break
loose and appear as independent forms, but in fact have exist¬
ence and reality only as grounded in that Becoming, and possess
their truth only in so far as they are and remain in it.

349. If we take this goal—and this is the Notion which for
us has already appeared on the scene—in its reality, viz. the
self-consciousness that is recognized and acknowledged, and
which has its own self-certainty in the other free self-conscious¬
ness, and possesses its truth precisely in that ‘other’; in other
words, if we look on this still inner Spirit as Substance that has
already advanced to the stage of having an outer existence, then
in this Notion there is disclosed the realm of ethical life. For this
is nothing else than the absolute spiritual unity of the essence
of individuals in their independent actual existence ; it is an in¬
trinsically universal self-consciousness that takes itself to be
actual in another consciousness, in such wise that this has com¬
plete independence, or is looked on as a Thing, and it is pre¬
cisely therein that the universal self-consciousness is aware of
its unity with it, and only in this unity with this objective being
is it self-consciousness. This ethical Substance , taken in its
abstract universality, is only law in the form of thought] but it
is no less immediately actual self consciousness , or it is custom. The
single individual consciousness, conversely, is only this existent
unit in so far as it is aware of the universal consciousness in
its individuality as its own being, since what it does and is, is
the universal custom.

35 °- It is in fact in the life of a people or nation that the
Notion of self-conscious Reason’s actualization—of beholding,
in the independence of the ‘other’, complete unity with it, or
having for my object the free thinghood of an ‘other’ which
confronts me and is the negative of myself, as my own being-
for-myself— that the Notion has its complete reality. Reason is
present here as the fluid universal Substance , as unchangeable
simple thinghood, which yet bursts asunder into many com¬
pletely independent beings, just as light bursts asunder into
stars as countless self-luminous points, which in their absolute
being-for-self are dissolved, not merely implicitly in the simple
independent Substance, but explicitly for themselves. They are
conscious of being these separate independent beings through


ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS 213

the sacrifice of their particularity, and by having this universal
Substance as their soul and essence, just as this universal again
is their own doing as particular individuals, or is the work that
they have produced.

35 *• The purely particular activity and occupation of the
individual refers to the needs which he has as a natural creature,
i.e. as a merely immediate individuality. That even these, its com¬
monest functions, are not frustrated, but enjoy an actual exist¬
ence, is due to the universal sustaining medium, to the might
of the entire nation. But, in the universal Substance, the indivi¬
dual has this form of subsistence not only for his activity as such,
but no less also for the content of that activity; what he does is
the skill and customary practice of all. This content, in so far
as it is completely particularized, is, in its actual existence, con¬
fined within the framework of the activity of all. The labour of
the individual for his own needs is just as much a satisfaction
of the needs of others as of his own, and the satisfaction of his
own needs he obtains only through the labour of others. As the
individual in his individual work already unconsciously performs
a universal work, so again he also performs the universal work
as his conscious object; the whole becomes, as a whole, his own
work, for which he sacrifices himself and precisely in so doing
receives back from it his own self. There is nothing here which
would not be reciprocal, nothing in relation to which the inde¬
pendence of the individual would not, in the dissolution of its
being-for-self in the negation of itself, give itself its positive signifi¬
cance of being/or itself . This unity of being-for-another or mak¬
ing oneself a Thing, and of being-for-self, this universal Sub¬
stance, speaks its universal language in the customs and laws of
its nation. But this existent unchangeable essence is the expres¬
sion of the very individuality which seems opposed to it; the
laws proclaim what each individual is and does; the individual
knows them not only as his universal objective thinghood, but
equally knows himself in them, or knows them as particularized
in his own individuality, and in each of his fellow citizens. In
the universal Spirit, therefore, each has only the certainty of
himself, of finding in the actual world nothing but himself; he
is as certain of the others as he is of himself. I perceive in all
of them the fact that they know themselves to be only these
independent beings, just as I am. I perceive in them the free


214


C. (AA.) REASON


unity with others in such wise that, just as this unity exists
through me, so it exists through the others too—I regard them

as myself and myself as them.

oc 2 In a free nation, therefore, Reason is in truth realized.
It is a present living Spirit in which the individual not only
finds his essential character, i.e. his universal and particular
nature, expressed, and present to him in the form of thinghood,
but is himself this essence, and also has realized that essential
character. The wisest men of antiquity have therefore declared
that wisdom and virtue consist in living in accordance with the
customs of one’s nation. .

353 . But from this happy state of having realized its essential
character and of living in it, self-consciousness, which at first
is Spirit only immediately and in principle , has withdrawn, or else
has not yet realized it; for both may equally well be said.

354 . Reason must withdraw from this happy state; for the
life of a free people is only in principle or immediately the reality
of an ethical order. In other words, the ethical order exists
merely as something given; therefore this universal Spirit itself
is a separate, individual spirit, and the customs and laws in their
entirety are a specific ethical substance, which only in the higher
stage, viz. in Spirit’s consciousness of its essence, sheds this limi¬
tation and in this knowledge alone has its absolute truth, not
directly as it immediately is. In the latter form it is a limited ethical
substance, and absolute limitation is just this, that Spirit is in
the form of [mere] being.

355. Further, therefore, the single, individual consciousness
as it exists immediately in the real ethical order, or in the nation,
is a solid unshaken trust in which Spirit has not, for the indivi¬
dual, resolved itself into its abstract moments, and therefore he
is not aware of himself as being a pure individuality on his own
account. But once he has arrived at this idea, as he must, then
this immediate unity with Spirit, the [mere] being of himself in
Spirit, his trust, is lost. Isolated and on his own, it is he who
is now the essence, no longer universal Spirit. This individuality
of self-consciousness is, it is true, a moment in universal Spirit
itself, but only as a vanishing quantity which, appearing on its
own, is at once resolved within universal Spirit, and enters con¬
sciousness merely as trust. In thus establishing himself—and
each moment, because it is a moment of the essence, must sue-


ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS 215

ceed in exhibiting itself as the essence—the individual has
thereby placed himself in opposition to the laws and customs.
These are regarded as mere ideas having no absolute essenti¬
ality, an abstract theory without any reality, while he as this
particular T’ is his own living truth.

356. Or, self-consciousness has not yet attained this happy state
of being the ethical substance, the Spirit of a people. For having
turned back from its role of observer, Spirit, at first, is not yet
as such realized through itself; it is established only as an inner
essence or as an abstraction. In other words, Spirit is, at first,
immediate ; but existing immediately, it is separate and indivi¬
dual. It is the practical consciousness, which steps into its world
which it finds already given , with the aim of duplicating itself
in this distinct form of something separate and individual, of
producing itself as this individual, as this existent counterpart
of itself, and of becoming conscious of this unity of its own actu¬
ality with the objective being of the world. Self-consciousness
has the certainty of this unity; it holds that the unity is implicitly
already present, or that this agreement of itself with thinghood
already exists, and has only to become so for it through its own
agency; or that the production of that unity is equally the find¬
ing of it. Since this unity means happiness, the individual is
sent out into the world by his own spirit to seek his happiness.

357. If, then for us the truth of this rational self-consciousness
is the ethical substance, here, for that self consciousness, it is the
beginning of its ethical experience of the world. In so far as
it has not yet become the ethical substance, this movement
presses forward to it, and what is superseded in the movement
are the individual moments which for self-consciousness are
valid in their isolation. They have the form of an immediate
will or natural impulse which obtains its satisfaction, which is itself
the content of a fresh impulse. If, however, self-consciousness
has lost the happiness of being in the substance, these natural
impulses are bound up with an awareness that their goal is the
true character and essential nature of self-consciousness. The
ethical substance has sunk to the level of a predicate devoid
of self, whose living subjects are individuals who themselves
have to provide the filling for their universality and to fulfil
their essential nature through their own efforts. Taken in the
former sense, then, those forms are the coming-to-be of the


2 l6


C. (AA.) REASON


ethical substance and precede it; in the latter, they succeed it
and reveal toself-consciousness what its essential nature is. In the
former case, the immediacy or rawness of the impulses gets lost
in the process of getting to know what their truth is, and their
content takes on a higher form. In the latter case, what is lost
is the false idea of the consciousness which places its essential
nature in those impulses. In the former case, the goal they attain
is the ethical Substance, while, in the latter, it is the conscious¬
ness of that Substance, a consciousness which knows the Sub¬
stance to be its own essence; and to that extent this process
would be the coming into existence of morality, of a higher form
than the ethical Substance. But these forms, at the same time,
constitute only one side of morality’s entry into existence, that,
namely, which belongs to being-for-selj\ or in which conscious¬
ness sets aside its Ends—not the side where morality arises from
the [ethical] substance itself. Since these moments cannot as
yet carry the significance of being made into Ends opposed to
the lost ethical order, they signify here, it is true, no more than
what they immediately are, and the goal which they strive to
attain is the ethical Substance; but since in our times that form
ot these moments is more familiar in which they appear after
consciousness has lost its ethical life and, in the search for it,
repeats t ose orms, they may be represented more in terms of


35 • e f-consciousness which is at first only the Notion of
pint, enters on this path with the characteristic of holding itself
o e, as a particular spirit, essential being; and its aim, there-
ore, is to give itself as a particular individual an actual existence
and to enjoy itself as an individual in it.

it PI * n h ° lding * tse ^ to be, qua being-for-self, essential being,
s e negativity of the ‘other’. In its consciousness, therefore,
i appears as t e Positive in contrast to something which cer-
am.y ls \ ^ ^ lc h has for it the significance of something with-
ou intrinsic eing; consciousness appears split into this given
ac ua ity an t e £W which it realizes by superseding that
ac ua ity, an ndI which, in fact, it makes an actuality in

place of that which was given. Its primary End, however, is its
immediate zbstractbeing-for-self; in other words, seeing itself as
t is particular individual in another, or seeing another self-con-
sciousness as itself, i he experience of what the truth of this End


ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS 217

is raises self-consciousness to a higher level, and from now on
it is itself its own End, in so far as it is at the same time universal
and has the law directly within it. In carrying out this law of
its heart, however, it learns that the individual, in doing so,
cannot preserve himself, but rather tht the good can only be
accomplished through the sacrifice of the individual: and self-
consciousness becomes virtue. What virtue learns from experi¬
ence can only be this, that its End is already attained in prin¬
ciple, that happiness is found directly in the action itself, and
that action itself is the good. The Notion or principle of this
entire sphere, viz. that thinghood is Spirit’s very being for-itself\
becomes in the course of this experience a truth for self-con¬
sciousness. Having discovered this, self-consciousness thus
knows itself to be reality in the form of an individuality that
directly expresses itself an individuality which no longer
encounters resistance from an actual world opposed to it, and
whose aim and object are only this expressing of itself.

a. Pleasure and Necessity

360. Self-consciousness which, on the whole, knows itself to be
reality , has its object in its own self, but as an object which ini¬
tially is merely for self-consciousness , and does not as yet possess
[objective] being which confronts it as a reality other than its
own; and self-consciousness, by behaving as a being-for-self,
aims to see itself as another independent being. This primary
End is to become aware of itself as an individual in the other
self-consciousness, or to make this other into itself; it is certain
that this other is in principle already itself. In so far as it has
lifted itself out of the ethical Substance and the tranquil being
of thought to its being -for-self it has left behind the law of cus¬
tom and existence, the knowledge acquired through observa¬
tion, and theory, as a grey shadow which is in the act of passing
out of sight. For the latter is rather a knowledge of something
whose being-for-self and actuality are other than those of this
self-consciousness. Instead of the heavenly-seeming Spirit
of the universality of knowledge and action in which the feel¬
ing and enjoyment of individuality are stilled, there has
entered into it the Spirit of the earth, for which true actuality
is merely that being which is the actuality of the individual con¬
sciousness.


218


C. (AA.) REASON

It despises intellect and science
The supreme gifts of man
It has given itself to the devil
And must perish 1

361. It plunges therefore into life and indulges to the full the
pure individuality in which it appears. It does not so much
make its own happiness as straightway take it and enjoy it. The
shadowy existence of science, laws and principles, which alone
stand between it and its own reality, vanishes like a lifeless mist
which cannot compare with the certainty of its own reality. It
takes hold of life much as a ripe fruit is plucked, which readily
offers itself to the hand that takes it.

362. Its action is only in one respect an action of desire. It
does not aim at the destruction of objective being in its entirety,
but only at the form of its otherness or its independence, which
is a show devoid of essence; for it holds this objectivity to be
in principle the same essence as itself, or its selfhood. The element
in which desire and its object subsist, as mutually indifferent
and independent, is animate existence; the enjoyment of desire
puts an end to this existence so far as it belongs to the object
of desire. But here this element which gives to both a separate
actuality is rather the category, a being which is essentially
in the form of thought. It is therefore the consciousness of indepen¬
dence let it be natural consciousness, or consciousness de¬
veloped into a system of laws—which preserves the individuals
each for himself. This separation is not in itself a fact for self-
consciousness, which knows the other as its own selfhood. It
attains therefore to the enjoyment of pleasure , to the conscious¬
ness of its actualization in a consciousness which appears as in¬
dependent, or to the vision of the unity of the two independent
self-consciousnesses. It attains its End, but only to learn there
what the truth of that End is. It comprehends itself as this par¬
ticular individual who exists for himself \ but the realization of
this End is itself the setting-aside of the latter. For it is not as
this particular individual that it becomes an object to itself, but
rather as the unity of itself and the other self-consciousness,
hence as an individual that is only a moment, or a universal.

363. The pleasure enjoyed has indeed the positive signifi-

1 Faust, Part I (adapted).


ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


219


cance that self-consciousness has become objective to itself ; but
equally it has the negative one of having reduced itself to a
moment. And since it grasped its realization in the former sense
only, its experience is of a contradiction in which the attained
reality of its individuality sees itself destroyed by the negative
essence confronting it, which is devoid of reality and content,
and which yet is the power which destroys it. This essence is
nothing else than the Notion of what this individuality in itself
is. It is, however, as yet the poorest form of self-realizing Spirit;
for it is aware of itself at first only as the abstraction of Reason,
or is the immediacy of the unity of bein gfor-itself and being-m-
itself\ its essence is, therefore, only the abstract category. Never¬
theless it no longer has the form of immediate simple being, as
it has for Reason in its observational role where it is abstract
being or, posited in the form of an alien being, is thinghood in
general. Here in this thinghood there has entered being-for-self
and mediation. It therefore makes its appearance as a circle
whose content is the developed pure relation of the simple essen¬
tialities. The realization attained by this individuality consists
therefore in nothing more than this, viz. that it has cast forth
this circle of abstractions from its confinement within simple self-
consciousness, into the element where they are for self-con¬
sciousness, in other words, are expanded into an objective ex¬
istence. The object , then, that is for self-consciousness as it takes
its pleasure its essence is the expansion of those empty essentiali¬
ties of pure unity, of pure difference, and their relation; beyond
this, the object which the individuality experiences as its essence ,
has no content. It is what is called necessity ; for necessity, fate,
and the like, is just that about which we cannot say what it does,
what its specific laws and positive content are, because it is the
absolute pure Notion itself viewed as [mere] being , a relation that
is simple and empty, but also irresistible and imperturbable,
whose work is merely the nothingness of individuality. It is this
fixed relation, because what is related is the pure essentialities
or empty abstractions. Unity, difference, and relation are cate¬
gories each of which is nothing in and for itself, but only in
relation to its opposite, and they cannot therefore be separated
from one another. They are related to one another through
their Notion , for they are pure Notions themselves; and this abso¬
lute relation and abstract movement constitutes necessity. The


220


C. (AA.) REASON


merely single individuality which, in the first instance, has only
the pure Notion of Reason for its content, instead of having
taken the plunge from dead Theory into Life, has there¬
fore really only plunged into the consciousness of its own life¬
lessness and has as its lot only empty and alien necessity, a dead
actuality.

364. The transition is made from the form of the one or unit
into that of universality , from one absolute abstraction into the
other, from the purpose of pure being-for-self which has thrown
off all community with others, into the sheer opposite which
is thus equally abstract being-in-itself. Consequently, the form
in which this appears is that the individual has simply perished,
and the absolute unyieldingness of individual existence is pul¬
verized on the equally unrelenting but continuous world of ac¬
tuality. Since it is, as consciousness, the unity of itself and its
opposite, this downfall is still for it its goal and realization, as
also the contradiction of what was for it essence and what is
in itself essence. It experiences the double meaning implicit in
what it did, viz. when it took hold of life and possessed it ; but
in doing so it really laid hold of death.

365. This transition of its living being into a lifeless necessity
therefore appears to it as an inversion which is not mediated by
anything at all. The mediating agency would have to be that in
which both sides would be one, where, therefore, consciousness
recognized one moment in the other: its purpose and action
in fate, and its fate in its purpose and action, that is, would
recognize its own essence in this necessity. But this unity is, for
this consciousness, just pleasure itself, or the simple single feel-
mg, and the transition from the moment of this its purpose into
the moment of its true essence is for it a sheer leap into its anti¬
thesis. For these moments are not contained and linked together
in feeling, but only in the pure self, which is a universal or
thought. Consciousness, therefore, through its experience in
which it should have found its truth, has really become a riddle
to itself, the consequences of its deeds are for it not the deeds
themselves. What befalls it is ,for it , not the experience of what
it is in itself the transition is not a mere alteration of the form
of the same content and essence, presented now as the content
and essence, and again as object or [outwardly] beheld essence
of itself. The abstract necessity therefore has the character of the


ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


221


merely negative, uncomprehended power of universality, on
which individuality is smashed to pieces.

366. This is as far as the manifestation of this form of self-
consciousness goes. The final moment of its existence is the
thought of the loss of itself in necessity, or the thought of itself
as a being that is absolutely alien to it. However, self-conscious¬
ness has in itself survived this loss; for this necessity or pure uni¬
versality is its own essence. This reflection of consciousness into
itself, the knowledge that necessity is itself, is a new form of con¬
sciousness.

b. The law of the heart and the frenzy of self-conceit

367. What necessity truly is in self-consciousness, it is for this
new form of self-consciousness, in which it knows its own self
to be the principle of necessity. It knows that it has the universal
of law immediately within itself, and because the law is immediately
present in the being-for-^//'of consciousness, it is called the law
of the heart. This form takes itself to be, qua individuality,
essence like the previous form; but the new form is richer
because its being for-self has for it the character of necessity or
universality.

368. The law, therefore, which is immediately self-con¬
sciousness’s own law, or a heart which, however, has within it
a law, is the End which self-consciousness proceeds to realize.
We have to see whether its realization corresponds to this
Notion and whether in that realization it will find that this its
law is its essential nature.

369. This heart is confronted by a real world; for in the heart
the law is, in the first place, only for its own self, it is not yet
realised, and is therefore at the same time something other than
what the Notion is. This other is thereby characterized as a
reality which is the opposite of what is to be realized, and con¬
sequently is the contradiction of the law and the individuality.
This reality is, therefore, on the one hand a law by which the
particular individuality is oppressed, a violent ordering of the
world which contradicts the law of the heart, and, on the other
hand, a humanity suffering under that ordering, a humanity
that does not follow the law of the heart, but is subjected to
an alien necessity. It is evident that this real world which
appears over against the present form of consciousness is


222


C. (AA.) REASON


nothing else but the foregoing discordant relationship of indivi¬
duality and its truth, the relationship ofa cruel necessity by which
the former is oppressed. For us , the preceding movement
appears to stand over against the new form, because the latter
in itself has resulted from it, and the moment from which it
has come is therefore necessary for it; but to the new form that
moment appears as something already given , since it is not con¬
scious of its origin , and it holds that its essential nature is rather
to be for its own self, or the negative element relatively to this
positive in-itself

370. This individuality therefore directs its energies to get¬
ting rid of this necessity which contradicts the law of the heart,
and also the suffering caused by it. And so it is no longer charac¬
terized by the levity of the previous form of self-consciousness,
which only wanted the particular pleasure of the individual;
on the contrary, it is the earnestness of a high purpose which
seeks its pleasure in displaying the excellence of its own nature,
and in promoting the welfare of mankind. What it realizes is
itself the law, and its pleasure is therefore at the same time the
universal pleasure of all hearts. To it the two are undivided;
its pleasure is what conforms to the law, and the realization
of the law of universal humanity procures for it its own particu¬
lar pleasure. For within its own self, individuality and the neces¬
sary ar t immediately one; the law is the law of the heart. Indivi¬
duality is not as yet dislodged from its seat, and the unity of
oth has not been brought about by the mediating agency of
t e individuality itself, has not yet been achieved by discipline.

e realization of the immediate undisciplined nature passes for
a display of its excellence and as productive of the welfare of
humanity.

37 l - The law, on the other hand, which confronts the law of
the heart is separated from the heart, and exists in its own right.
Humanity which is bound by this law does not live in the blessed
unity of the law with the heart; but either lives in their cruel
separation and in suffering, or at least dispenses with the en¬
joyment of itself in obeying the law, and lacks the consciousness
of its own excellence in transgressing it. Because that authori¬
tative divine and human ordinance is separated from the heart,
it is for the latter a mere show which ought to lose what is still
associated with it, viz. the power of authority and reality. In


ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


223


its content it may well by chance agree with the law of the heart,
and then the latter can submit to it; but for the heart, what
is essential is not the bare conformity to law as such, but that
in the law it has the consciousness of itself\ that therein it has
satisfied itself. Where, however, the content of universal
necessity does not agree with the heart then necessity, even as
regards its content, is in itself nothing and must give way before
the law of the heart.

372. The individual, then, carries out the law of his heart. This
becomes a universal ordinance, and pleasure becomes a reality
which absolutely conforms to law. But, in this realization, the
law has in fact escaped the individual; it directly becomes
merely the relation which was supposed to be got rid of. The
law of the heart, through its very realization, ceases to be a law
of the heart . For in its realization it receives the form of an
[affirmative] being, and is now a universal power for which this
particular heart is a matter of indifference, so that the indivi¬
dual, by setting up his own ordinance, no longer finds it to be
his own. Consequently, what the individual brings into being
through the realization of his law, is not his law; on the contrary,
since the realization is in principle his own, but actually is for
him an alien affair, what he brings about is merely the entangle¬
ment of himself in the actual ordinance, an entanglement in
it, moreover, not as a superior power which is only alien to him,
but one which is hostile. By his act he places himself in, or rather
posits himself as, the universal element of existent reality, and
his act is supposed to have, even according to his own inter¬
pretation, the value of a universal ordinance. But he has thereby
freed himself from himself; he goes on growing qua universality,
on his own account and purges himself of his particularity. The
individual who wants to recognize universality only in the form
of his immediate being-for-self does not therefore recognize
himself in this free universality, while at the same time he
belongs to it, for it is his doing. This doing, therefore, has the
reverse significance; it contradicts the universal ordinance, for
the individual’s act is supposed to be the act of his particular
heart, not a free universal reality; and at the same time he has
in fact recognized the latter, for his action has the significance
of positing his essential being as a free reality, i.e. of acknow¬
ledging the real world to be his own essential being.


224


C. (AA.) REASON


373. The individual has, by the principle of his action, deter¬
mined the more precise way in which the actual universality,
to which he has attached himself, turns against him. His deed,
qua actuality , belongs to the universal; but its content is his own
individuality which, as this particular individuality, wants to
preserve itself in opposition to the universal. It is not any specific
law the setting-up of which would be in question; on the con¬
trary, the immediate unity of the individual heart with uni¬
versality is the thought, elevated into a supposedly valid law,
that, in what is law, every heart must recognize its own self. But
only the heart of this individual has placed its reality in its deed,
which expresses for him his being-for-self or his pleasure. The deed
is supposed to have immediately the status of a universal; that
is to say, it is in truth something particular, and has merely
the form of universality; the particular content of the heart as
such is supposed to have the status of a universal. Consequently,
others do not find in this content the fulfilment of the law of
their hearts, but rather that of someone else; and, precisely in
accordance with the universal law that each shall find in what
is law his own heart, they turn against the reality he set up, just
as he turned against theirs. Thus, just as the individual at first
finds only the rigid law, now he finds the hearts of men them¬
selves, opposed to his excellent intentions and detestable.

374 - Because this consciousness at first knows universality
only as immediate , and necessity as necessity of the heart , the
nature of the realization and the activity is unknown to it; it
does not know that this realization as what affirmatively is, is in
truth rather the implicit universal in which the individuality of
consciousness, which entrusts itself to it in order to be this par¬
ticular immediate individuality, really perishes; instead of
acquiring a being of its own, it therefore attains to being the
alienation of itself. But that in which it does not recognize itself
is no longer a dead necessity, but a necessity animated by the
universal individuality. It took this divine and human ordi¬
nance which it found as an accepted authority to be a dead
authority in which not only its own self—to which it clings as
this particular independent heart opposed to the universal—
but also those subject to that ordinance would have no con¬
sciousness of themselves; but it finds that this ordinance is really
animated by the consciousness of all, that it is the law of every


ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


225


heart. It learns from experience that the reality is a vivified ordi¬
nance, and it learns this in fact precisely in realizing the law
of its own heart; for this means nothing else than that individu¬
ality becomes an object to itself in the form of universality in
which, however, it does not recognize itself.

375. Thus what emerges from the experience of this shape
of self-consciousness as the true, contradicts what this conscious¬
ness is for itself. But what it is for itself, has itself the form of
absolute universality for it, and it is the law of the heart which
is immediately one with the consciousness of self At the same
time, the established living order is equally its own essential being
and work; it produces nothing else but that; that order is in
equally immediate unity with self-consciousness. In this way
self-consciousness is related to a twofold antithetic essence;
it is in its own self a contradiction, and is distraught in its inmost
being. The law of this particular heart is alone that in which
self-consciousness recognizes itself; but the universally valid
order has, through the realizing of that law, equally become
for self-consciousness its own essential being and its own reality.
Thus what contradicts itself in its consciousness has for it in each
case the form of essence and of its own reality.

376. In giving expression to this moment of its self-conscious
downfall as the result of its experience, it reveals itself to be
this inner perversion of itself, to be a deranged consciousness
which finds that its essential being is immediately non-essential,
its reality immediately an unreality. The derangement cannot
be taken to mean that in general something devoid of essence
is regarded as essential, something unreal as real, so that what
for one person is essential or real would not be so for another,
and that the consciousness of reality and unreality, or of essenti¬
ality and unessentiality, would thus fall apart. If something is
in fact real and essential for consciousness in general, but is
not so for me, then in the consciousness of its nothingness I have
at the same time—since I am consciousness in general—the
consciousness of its reality; and since they are both fixed [in
my consciousness], this is a unity which is madness in general.
But in this state only an object is deranged for consciousness,
not consciousness as such within and for itself. But in the out¬
come of experience which here has come to view, consciousness,
in its law, is aware of being itself this reality; and at the same


226


C. (AA.) REASON

time, since the very same essentiality, the same reality, is
alienated from it, it is, qua self-consciousness, qua absolute reality,
aware of its own unreality. In other words, it holds the two sides
in their contradiction to be immediately its essential being,
which is thus in its inmost being distraught.

377. The heart-throb for the welfare of humanity therefore
passes into the ravings of an insane self-conceit, into the fury of
consciousness to preserve itself from destruction; and it does this
by expelling from itself the perversion which it is itself, and by
striving to look on it and express it as something else. It therefore
speaks of the universal order as a perversion of the law of the
heart and of its happiness, a perversion invented by fanatical
priests, gluttonous despots and their minions, who compensate
themselves for their own degradation by degrading and
oppressing others, a perversion which has led to the nameless
misery of deluded humanity. In this its derangement, con¬
sciousness declares individuality to be the source of this de¬
rangement and perversion, but one that is alien and accidental.
It is the heart, however, or the individuality of consciousness
that would be immediately universal, that is itself the source
of this derangement and perversion, and the outcome of its
action is merely that its consciousness becomes aware of this
contradiction. For the True is for it the law of the heart—some¬
thing merely intended which, unlike the established order, has
not stood the test of time, but rather when thus .tested is over¬
thrown. This its law ought to have reality; the law, then, is for
it^«areality,^wavalidordinance,itsownaimandessential nature;
but reality, that very law qua valid ordinance , is on the contrary
immediately for it something which is not valid. Similarly, its
own reality, the heart itself as a particular individual conscious¬
ness, is for it its essence; but its purpose is to establish that par¬
ticular individuality as an [objective] being. Thus it is rather
its self as not a particular individual that is immediately for it
its essence, or its purpose has the form of a law, hence the form
of a universality, which it is for its own consciousness. This its
Notion becomes by its own action its object; thus the heart
learns rather that its self is not real, and that its reality is an
unreality. It is therefore not an accidental and alien individu¬
ality, but just this particular heart, which in all its aspects is,
in its own self, perverted and perverting.


ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS 227

378. While, however, the immediately universal individuality
is perverted and the source of perversion, this universal ordi¬
nance, since it is the law of all hearts , i.e. of what is perverted,
is no less itself essentially perverted, as the ravings of the
deranged consciousness declared. On the one hand, this ordi¬
nance proves itself to be a law of all hearts, by the resistance
which the law of one individual heart encounters from other
individuals. The established laws are defended against the law
of an individual, because they are not an unconscious, empty,
and dead necessity, but a spiritual universality and Substance,
in which those in whom this spiritual substance has its actuality
live as individuals, and are conscious of themselves; so that even
when they complain about this ordinance as if it went against
their own inner law, and maintain against it the opinions of
the heart, they cling to it with their hearts, as being their essen¬
tial being; and, if this ordinance is taken from them, or they
place themselves outside it, they lose everything. Since it is pre¬
cisely in this that the reality and power of public order consist,
the latter thus appears as the self-identical essence alive in
everyone, and individuality appears as its form. But this ordi¬
nance is equally a perversion.

379. The fact that it is the law of all hearts, that all indivi¬
duals are immediately this universal, means that the ordinance
is a reality which is only that of the individuality that is for itself
or as only the reality of the heart. The consciousness which sets
up the law of its heart therefore meets with resistance from
others, because it contradicts the equally individual laws of their
hearts; and these others in their resistance are doing nothing
else but setting up and claiming validity for their own law. The
universal that we have here is, then, only a universal resistance
and struggle of all against one another, in which each claims
validity for his own individuality, but at the same time does
not succeed in his efforts, because each meets with the same
resistance from the others, and is nullified by their reciprocal
resistance. What seems to be public order , then, is this universal
state of war, in which each wrests what he can for himself, exe¬
cutes justice on the individuality of others and establishes his
own, which is equally nullified through the action of the others.
It is the ‘way of the world’, the show of an unchanging course
that is only meant to be a universality, and whose content is


228


C. (AA.) REASON

rather the essenceless play of establishing and nullifying indivi¬
dualities.

380. If we contrast the two sides of the universal ordinance,
we see that this latter universality has for its content the restless
individuality which regards [mere] opinion or individuality as
law, what is real as unreal, and what is unreal as real. But it
is at the same time the side of the reality of the ordinance, for
to it belongs the individuality’s b eing for-self. The other side is
the universal in the form of a tranquil essence; but it is for that
very reason only something inner which, though not absolutely
non-existent, still has no reality and can itself become a reality
only by getting rid of the individuality which has arrogated
reality to itself. This shape of consciousness which, in the law,
is aware of itself \ which knows itself in what is intrinsically true
and good, not as an individuality but only as it becomes an
essential being; and which knows individuality to be perverted
and the source of perversion, and therefore knows it must sacri¬
fice the individuality of consciousness—this shape of conscious¬
ness is Virtue.

c. Virtue and the way of the world

381. In the first shape of active Reason, self-consciousness
took itself to be pure individuality, and it was confronted by
an empty universality. In the second, the two sides of the anti¬
thesis each had both moments within them, law and individu-
ality, but one side, the heart, was their immediate unity, the
other their antithesis. Here, in the relationship of virtue and
the way of the world’, the two members are each severally the
unity and antithesis of these moments, or are each a movement
of law and individuality towards one another, but a movement
of opposition. For the virtuous consciousness law is the essential
moment, and individuality the one to be nullified, and therefore
both in its own consciousness as well as in the ‘way of the world’.
In the former case, one’s own individuality is to be brought
under the discipline of the universal, the intrinsically true and
good; but under that discipline it still remains a personal con¬
sciousness. True discipline requires nothing less than the sacri¬
fice of the entire personality as proof that individual peculiari¬
ties are in fact no longer insisted on. In this individual sacrifice,
the individuality in the ‘way of the world’ is at the same time


22Q


ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

eradicated, for it too is a simple moment common to both. In
the ‘way of the world’, individuality behaves in a way which
is the reverse of its behaviour in the virtuous consciousness, viz.
it makes itself the essential moment, whereas what is intrinsically
good and true it subordinates to itself. Further, the ‘way of the
world’, too, is for virtue not merely this universal which is per -
verted by individuality ; on the contrary, the absolute order is like¬
wise a common moment, only one that is not present for con¬
sciousness as an existent reality , but as the inner essence of the
‘way of the world’. That order, strictly speaking, has not first
to be brought into existence by virtue, for to bring into existence
is, qua action, a consciousness of individuality, and individuality
is really what has to be nullified; but this nullifying of individu¬
ality merely makes room, as it were, for the in-itself of the ‘way
of the world’ to enter into existence on its own account.

382. The general content of the actual ‘way of the world’ we
already know; looked at more closely, it is again nothing else
but the two preceding movements of self-consciousness. From
them has issued the shape of virtue; since they are its origin,
they are antecedent to it; but virtue proceeds to nullify its ori¬
gin, and to realize itself, in other words, to become for itself.
The ‘way of the world’ is thus, on the one hand, the single in¬
dividuality which seeks its [own] pleasure and enjoyment. It
is true that in doing so it destroys itself, and thus satisfies the
universal, but this very satisfaction, like the rest of the moments
of this relationship, is a perverted form and movement of the
universal. The reality is only the individuality of the pleasure
and enjoyment to which, however, the universal is opposed, a
necessity which is merely the empty form of the universal, a
merely negative reaction and an action devoid of content. The
other moment of the ‘way of the world’ is the individuality
which claims to be law in its own right, and in its own conceit
disturbs the existing order. The universal law, it is true, pre¬
serves itself in face of this conceit, and no longer makes its
appearance as something opposed to consciousness and empty
of content, as a blind necessity, but as a necessity within conscious¬
ness itself. But, when it exists as the conscious relation of an abso¬
lutely contradictory reality, it is madness; as an objective reality,
however, it is perversion in general. The universal, then,
does display itself in both aspects as the might which moves


23 o c. (AA.) REASON

them, but the existence of this might is merely a universal
perversion.

383. It is from virtue now that the universal is to receive its
true reality by nullifying individuality, the principle of the per¬
version. Virtue’s purpose is, by so doing, to reverse again the
perverted ‘way of the world’ and to make manifest its true
essence. This true essence is at first only implicit in the ‘way
of the world’, only its in-itself\ it is not yet actual, and con¬
sequently virtue only believes it. This faith virtue proceeds to
raise to sight, without, however, enjoying the fruits of its labour
and sacrifice. For in so far as it is an individuality , it is the activity
of the conflict it wages with the ‘way of the world’; but its aim
and true nature is to conquer the reality of the ‘way of the
world’. The bringing into existence of the good thus effected
is thus the cessation of its activity or of the consciousness of indivi¬
duality. What wilfbe the outcome of this conflict itself, what
virtue learns from it, whether, by the sacrifice it makes of itself,
the ‘way of the world’ succumbs while virtue triumphs—this
must be decided by the nature of the living weapons borne by
the combatants. For the weapons are nothing else but the nature
of the combatants themselves, a nature which only makes its
appearance for both of them reciprocally. What their weapons
are is already evident from what is implicitly present in this
conflict.

384. The universal is true for the virtuous consciousness in
its faith, or is implicitly true; it is not yet an actual, but an abstract ,
universality; in this consciousness itself it is present as a purpose ,
in the ‘way of the world’ as an inner principle. It is precisely
in this determination that the universal is present in virtue, too,
in relation to the ‘way of the world’. For virtue as yet only wills
to accomplish the good, and does not, to begin with, claim that
it is a reality. This characteristic can also be looked at in this
way: the good, in making its appearance in the conflict with
the ‘way of the world’, thereby presents itself as being for an
other , as something that does not have a being of its own, for
otherwise it would not want to make itself true by conquering
its opposite. That it is, to begin with, only for an other , means
the same as was shown in the opposite way of looking at it, viz.
that it is, to begin with, an abstraction which has reality, not
in its own right, but only in its relation to the Svay of the world’.


ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS


231


385. The good or the universal, then, as it comes to view
there, is what are called gifts, capacities, powers. It is a mode
of the spiritual, in which it is represented as a universal, which
requires the principle of individuality to give it life and move¬
ment, and in this principle has an actual existence. This uni¬
versal is put to good use by the principle of individuality, in so
far as this principle lives in the virtuous consciousness, but is
misused in so far as it clings to the ‘way of the world’—a passive
instrument which, controlled by a free individuality which is
indifferent to the use it makes of it, can also be misused for the
production of an actual existence which destroys it: a lifeless
material lacking an independence of its own, which can be
formed this way or that, or even to its own ruin.

386. Since this universal is equally at the disposal of the vir¬
tuous consciousness and the ‘way of the world’, it is not
apparent whether virtue thus armed will conquer vice. The
weapons are the same; they are these capacities and powers.
Virtue has, it is true, held in reserve its belief in the original
unity of its own purpose and the essential nature of the ‘way
of the world’, a reserve that is intended to fall on the enemy
from the rear during the fight, and in principle to achieve that
aim. As a matter of fact, therefore, the knight of virtue’s own
part in the fighting is, strictly speaking, a sham-fight which he
cannot take seriously—because he knows that his true strength
lies in the fact that the good exists absolutely in its own right,
i.e. brings itself to fulfilment—a sham-fight which he also dare
not allow to become serious. For what he turns against the
enemy and finds turned against himself, and what he runs the
risk of wasting and damaging both in his own case as well as
that of the enemy, is not to be the good itself; for he fights to
preserve and accomplish that. What are risked in the fight are
only the gifts and capacities which are not themselves at issue.
But these are, in fact, nothing else but just that very universal
in which individuality has been nullified, which is supposed to
be preserved and realized by the conflict. But, at the same time,
this universal is already realized directly by the very notion of
the conflict, it is the in-itself, the universal, and its realization
means merely this, that it is at the same time for an ‘other’.
The two aspects specified above, in accordance with each of
which it became an abstraction, are no longer separated; it is


232


C. (AA.) REASON


especially in and through the conflict that the good is estab¬
lished in both modes. The virtuous consciousness, however,
enters into conflict with the ‘way of the world’, as if this were
something opposed to the good; what the conflict offers to it
is the universal, not merely as an abstract universal, but as a
universal animated by individuality and existing for an other,
in other words, the actual good. Therefore, wherever virtue
comes to grips with the ‘way of the world’, it always hits upon
places which are the actual existence of the good itself which,
as the in-itself oi the ‘way of the world’, is inextricably inter¬
woven in every manifestation of the ‘way of the world’. And
in the actuality of that in-itself, virtue has its own existence,
too; for virtue, therefore, the ‘way of the world’ is invulnerable.
All the moments which in virtue itself were supposed to be
risked and sacrificed, are just such existences of the good, and
hence are inviolable relationships. Consequently, the conflict
can only be an oscillation between preserving and sacrificing;
or rather there can be neither a sacrifice of what is one’s own,
nor a violation of what is alien. Virtue is not merely like the
combatant who, in the conflict, is only concerned with keeping
his sword bright, but it has even started the fight in order to
preserve the weapons. And not only o.an it not use its own
weapons, it must also preserve intact those of the enemy and
protect them against its own attack, for all are noble parts of
the good, on behalf of which it went into battle.

3 ^ 7 - For this enemy, on the other hand, what is the essence
is not the in-itselj\ the implicit universal, but individuality ; its
power, therefore, is the negative principle for which nothing
is established or absolutely sacred, but which can risk and
endure the loss of anything and everything. In doing so, it is
just as certain of victory through its own resources, as through
t e contradiction in which its opponent gets entangled. What
virtue holds to be an intrinsic being , the ‘way of the world’ regards
as merely an [indifferent] object; it is free from every principle
that virtue holds to be established, and by which it is bound.
Such a principle the ‘way of the world’ has in its power, since
it regards it as something it can either set aside or let be, as
it can also the virtuous knight who is fast-bound by it. The latter
cannot disentangle himself from it, as if it were a cloak thrown
round him from which he could free himself by leaving it


ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS 233

behind; for to him it is something essential which he must not
give up.

388. Finally, as regards the ambush from which the intrinsic-
ally good is to attack the ‘way of the world’ cunningly from
the rear, this is essentially a vain hope. The ‘way of the world’
is the alert, self-assured consciousness that cannot be got at from
behind, but faces in every direction; for its nature is that every¬
thing is [merely] an object for it, that everything stands in front
of it. But when the intrinsically good is an [indifferent] object
for the enemy, then it is involved in the conflict we have seen;
but in so far as it is not such an object but possesses intrinsic
being, it is the passive instrument of gifts and capacities, a
material lacking reality. If represented as a real being, it would
be a dormant consciousness, one remaining in the background,
no one knows where.

389. Virtue, therefore, is conquered by the ‘way of the world’
because its purpose is, in fact, the abstract, unreal essence , and
because its action as regards reality rests on distinctions which
are purely nominal. It wanted to consist in bringing the good
into actual existence by the sacrifice of individuality, but the
side of reality is itself nothing else but the side of individuality.
The good was supposed to be that which has an implicit being,
and to be opposed to what is; but the in-itself, taken in its real
and true sense, is rather being itself. The in-itself is, in the first
instance, the abstraction of essence in contrast to reality; but an
abstraction is precisely what is not true, but exists only for con¬
sciousness , which means, however, that it is itself what is called
real ; for the real is that which is essentially for an other , or is
being. But the consciousness of virtue rests on this distinction
between the in-itself and being , a distinction which has no truth.
The ‘way of the world’ was supposed to be the perversion of
the good because it had individuality for its principle; only,
individuality is the principle of the real world; for it is precisely
individuality that is consciousness, whereby what exists in itself
exists equally for an other ; it does pervert the Unchangeable,
but it perverts it in fact from the nothing of abstraction into the
being of reality.

390. Thus the ‘way of the world’ triumphs over what, in
opposition to it, constitutes virtue, triumphs over that which is
the essenceless abstraction of essence. However, it does not


234


C. (AA.) REASON

triumph over something real but over the creation of dis¬
tinctions that are no distinctions; it glories in this pompous talk
about doing what is best for humanity, about the oppression
of humanity, about making sacrifices for the sake of the good,
and the misuse of gifts. Ideal entities and purposes of this kind
are empty, ineffectual words which lift up the heart but leave
reason unsatisfied, which edify, but raise no edifice; declama¬
tions which specifically declare merely this: that the individual
who professes to act for such noble ends and who deals in such
fine phrases is in his own eyes an excellent creature—a puffing-
up which inflates him with a sense of importance in his own
eyes and in the eyes of others, whereas h t is, in fact, inflated
with his own conceit.

Virtue in the ancient world had its own definite sure mean¬
ing, for it had in the spiritual substance of the nation a foundation
full of meaning, and for its purpose an actual good already in
existence. Consequently, too, it was not directed against the
actual world as against something generally perverted , and against
a ‘way of the world 5 . But the virtue we are considering has its
being outside of the spiritual substance, it is an unreal virtue,
a virtue in imagination and name only, which lacks that sub¬
stantial content. The emptiness of this rhetoric which
denounces the ‘way of the world 5 would be at once revealed
if the meaning of its fine phrases had to be stated. These, there¬
fore, are assumed to be something the meaning of which is fami¬
liar. The request to say what this familiar meaning is would
be met either by a fresh flood of phrases or by an appeal to
the heart, which inwardly says what they mean—which amounts
to admitting that it is in fact unable to say what the meaning
is. The fatuousness of this rhetoric seems, too, in an unconscious
way to have come to be a certainty for the culture of our time,
since all interest in the whole mass of such rhetoric, and the
way it is used to boost one’s ego, has vanished—a loss of interest
which is expressed in the fact that it produces only a feeling
of boredom.

39 1 • The result, then, which issues from this antithesis con¬
sists in the fact that consciousness drops like a discarded cloak
its idea of a good that exists [only] in principle, but has as yet
no actual existence. In its conflict it has learnt by experience
that the ‘way of the world 5 is not as bad as it looked; for its


ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS 235

reality is the reality of the universal. With this lesson in mind,
the idea of bringing the good into existence by means of the
sacrifice of individuality is abandoned; for individuality is pre¬
cisely the actualizing of what exists only in principle, and the
perversion ceases to be regarded as a perversion of the good,
for it is in fact really the conversion of the good, as a mere End,
into an actual existence: the movement of individuality is the
reality of the universal.

392. However, with this result, that which as the ‘way of
the world’ stood opposed to the consciousness of what existed
[only] in principle, has in fact likewise been conquered and has
vanished. In that antithesis, individuality’s being-for-self was
opposed to essence or the universal, and appeared as a reality
separated from what exists [only] in itself or in principle. But,
since reality has shown itself to be in undivided unity with the
universal, then, just as the in-itself of virtue is merely an aspect,
so does the being-for-self of the ‘way of the world’ also prove
to be no more than that. The individuality of the ‘way of the
world’ may well imagine that it acts only for itself or in its own
interest. It is better than it thinks, for its action is at the same
time an implicitly universal action. When it acts in its own
interest, it simply does not know what it is doing; and when
it avers that everyone acts in his own interest, it is merely assert¬
ing that no one knows what action is. When it acts for itself
it simply gives reality to what, to begin with, exists only in itself
The purpose of its being-for-self, which it imagines is opposed
to what virtue is in itself, its shallow cunning, as also its fine¬
spun explanations which know how to demonstrate the pre¬
sence of self-interest in every action—all these have vanished,
just as the purpose of virtue that exists only in itself along with
its rhetoric, have vanished.

393. Thus the activity of individuality, all that it does, is in
its own self an End; the employment of its powers, the play of
these powers in action, is what gives them life; otherwise they
would be a lifeless in-itself. But the in-itselfis not an unrealized
abstract universal that lacks an existence, but rather is itself
immediately the present, real existence of the process of indivi¬
duality.


236


C. (AA.) REASON
