C. INDIVIDUALITY WHICH TAKES ITSELF TO BE REAL IN
AND FOR ITSELF

394. Self-consciousness has now grasped the Notion of itself
which, to begin with, was only our Notion of it, viz. that in its
certainty of itself it is all reality; and End and essence are for
it henceforth the spontaneous interfusion of the universal of
gifts and capacities—and individuality. The individual
moments of this fulfilling and interfusion, prior to the unity in
which they have coalesced, are the Ends hitherto considered.
These have vanished, being abstractions and chimeras belong¬
ing to those first shallow shapes of spiritual self-consciousness,
and having their truth only in the imaginary being of the heart,
in imagination and rhetoric, not in Reason. This^ being now
absolutely certain of its reality, no longer seeks only to realize
itself as End in an antithesis to the reality which immediately
confronts it but, on the contrary, has the category as such for
the object of its consciousness.

In other words, self-consciousness determined as being for
itself, or as the negative self-consciousness in which Reason at
first made its appearance, is set aside; this self-consciousness
came face to face with a reality supposedly the negative of it,
and only by overcoming it did it realize its End. But since End
and intrinsic being have proved to be the same as being-for-an¬
other and the reality confronting it, truth is no longer separated
from certainty, no matter whether the proposed End is taken
as certainty of self and the realization of it as truth, or whether
the End is taken for truth and the reality for certainty. On the
contrary, intrinsic being and End in and for itself are the cer¬
tainty of immediate reality itself, the interfusion of being-in-itself
and being-for-itself ‘ of the universal and individuality. Action
is in its own self its truth and reality, and individuality in its
setting-forth or expression is, in relation to action, the End in
and for itself.

395 - With this Notion of itself, therefore, self-consciousness
has returned into itself out of those opposed determinations
which the category had for it, and which characterized the re¬
lation of self-consciousness to the category in its observational
and also active roles. It has for its object the pure category
itself, or it is the category which has become aware of itself.


INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF 237

Its account with its previous shapes is thereby closed; they lie
forgotten behind it, and no longer confront it as a world given
to it, but are developed solely within itself as transparent
moments. Yet they still fall apart within its consciousness as a
movement of distinct moments, a movement which has not yet
brought them together into their substantial unity. But in all
these moments self-consciousness holds fast to the simple unity
of [objective] being and the self, a unity which is its genus.

396. In so doing, consciousness has cast away all opposition
and every condition affecting its action; it starts afresh from
itself, and is occupied not with an other , but with itself. Since
individuality is in its own self actuality, the material of its efforts
and the aim of action lie in the action itself. Action has, there¬
fore, the appearance of the movement of a circle which moves
freely within itself in a void, which, unimpeded, now expands,
now contracts, and is perfectly content to operate in and with
its own self. The element in which individuality sets forth its
shape has the significance solely of putting on the shape of in¬
dividuality; it is the daylight in which consciousness wants to
display itself. Action alters nothing and opposes nothing. It is
the pure form of a transition from a state of not being seen to
one of being seen, and the content which is brought out into
the daylight and displayed, is nothing else but what this action
already is in itself. It is implicit: this is its form as a unity in
thought ; and it is actual —this is its form as an existent unity. Action
itself is a content only when, in this determination of simplicity,
it is contrasted with its character as a transition and movement.

a. The spiritual animal kingdom and deceit , or the ( matter in hand y itself

39.7. This intrinsically real individuality is at first again a
single and specific one. The absolute reality which it knows itself
to be is, therefore, as it will become aware, an abstract , universal
reality lacking filling and content, merely the empty thought
of this category. We have to see how this Notion of intrinsically
real individuality characterizes itself in its moments, and how
its Notion of itself enters into its consciousness.

398. The Notion of this individuality, which as such knows
itself to be all reality, is to begin with a result: it has not yet
set forth its movement and reality, and is posited here immedi¬
ately as a simple in-itself or implicit being. Negativity, however,


238 c. (AA.) REASON

which is the same as that which is manifested as move¬
ment, is present in the simple in-itself as a determinateness; and
[mere] being , or the simple in-itself, becomes a definite range
of being. Accordingly, individuality appears on the scene as an
original determinate nature: original , for it is implicit; originally
determinate , for the negative moment is present in the in-itself
and this latter is thus a quality. This limitation of being, how¬
ever, cannot limit the action of consciousness, for here conscious¬
ness is a relation purely of itself to itself: relation to an other ,
which would be a limitation of it, has been eliminated. The
original determinateness of the nature is, therefore, only a
simple principle, a transparent universal element, in which the
individuality remains as free and self-identical as it is un¬
impeded in unfolding its different moments, and in its realiza¬
tion is simply in a reciprocal relation with itself; just as in the
case of indeterminate animal life, which breathes the breath
of life, let us say, into the element of water, or air or earth, and
within these again into more specific principles, steeping its
entire nature in them, and yet keeping that nature under its
own control, and preserving itself as a unity, in spite of the limi¬
tation imposed by the element, and remaining in the form of
this particular organization the same general animal life.

399. This determinate original nature of consciousness which
remains free and entire in it appears as the immediate and
sole proper content of that which for the individual is its End.
Admittedly, it is a determinate content, but it is only a content
at all in so far as we consider the in-itself in isolation. In truth,
however, it is the reality that is permeated by individuality,
actuality as it is present in consciousness qua individual, and
it is, in the first instance, posited as [merely] being , not yet as
acting. But as regards action, that determinateness is, on the one
hand, not a limitation it would want to overcome, for, regarded
as an existent quality, it is the simple colour of the element in
which it moves; on the other hand, however, negativity is a
determinateness only in being; but action is itself nothing else but
negativity. Therefore, when individuality acts, determinateness
is dissolved in the general process of negativity or in the sum
total of every determinateness.

400. In action and the consciousness of action, the simple
original nature now splits up into the distinction which action


INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF


239


implies. Action is present at first in the form of object, an object,
too, as pertaining to consciousness, as End , and hence opposed
to a reality already given. The second moment is the move¬
ment of the End conceived as passive, and realization conceived
as the relation of the End to the wholly formal actuality, hence
the idea of the transition itself, or the means. The third moment
is, finally, the object, which is no longer in the form of an End
directly known by the agent to be his own , but as brought out
into the light of day and having/or him the form of an ‘other’.
The Notion of this sphere requires that these various aspects
be grasped in such a way that the content in them remains the
same without any distinction, whether between individuality
and being in general, or between End as against individuality
as an original nature, or between End and the given reality;
or between the means and that reality as an absolute End, or
between the reality brought about by the agent as against the
End, or the original nature, or the means.

401. First of all, then, the originally determinate nature [or
natural predisposition] of individuality, its immediate essence, is
not as yet posited as active, and as such is called special capacity,
talent, character, and so on. This peculiar tinge of Spirit is to
be looked on as the sole content of the End itself and as the
sole reality. Ifwe thought of consciousness as going beyond that,
and as wanting to give reality to a different content, then we
should be thinking of it as a Nothing working towards Nothing.
Further, this original essence is not merely the content of the
End, but is in itself the reality as well, which otherwise has the
appearance of being a given material of the action, of being a
reality found to begin with , which is to be shaped by the action.
That is to say, action simply translates an initially implicit being
into a being that is made explicit; the being-in-itself of the
reality opposed to consciousness is reduced to a mere empty
show. This consciousness, then, when bringing itself to act, does
not let itself be led astray by what is merely the show of a given
reality, and equally it has to avoid floundering about in empty
thoughts and Ends, and has to hold on to the original content
ofits essence. True, this original content is only explicit/or con¬
sciousness when the latter has made it into a reality; but the
distinction between a content, which is explicit for consciousness
only within consciousness itself \ and an intrinsic reality outside it,


240


C. (AA.) REASON


no longer exists. Consciousness must act merely in order that
what it is in itself may become explicit for it; in other words,
action is simply the coming-to-be of Spirit as consciousness. What
the latter is in itself it knows therefore from what it actually is.
Accordingly, an individual cannot know what he [really] is un¬
til he has made himself a reality through action. However, this
seems to imply that he cannot determine the End of his action
until he has carried it out; but at the same time, since he is
a conscious individual, he must have the action in front of him
beforehand as entirely his own, i.e. as an End. The individual who
is going to act seems, therefore, to find himself in a circle in
which each moment already presupposes the other, and thus
he seems unable to find a beginning, because he only gets to
know his original nature, which must be his End, from the deed,
while, in order to act, he must have that End beforehand. But
for that very reason he has to start immediately, and, whatever
the circumstances, without further scruples about beginning,
means, or End, proceed to action; for his essence and intrinsic
nature,is beginning, means, and End, all in one. As beginning,
this nature is present in the circumstances of the action; and
the interest which the individual finds in something is the answer
already given to the question, ‘whether he should act, and what
should be done in a given case’. For what seems to be a given
reality is in itself his own original nature, which has merely the
illusory appearance of an [objective] being—an appearance
implied in the Notion of action with its twofold aspect, but
which shows itself to be his own original nature by the interest
he takes in it. Similarly, the ‘how’ or the means is determined
in and for itself. Talent is likewise nothing else but the determi¬
nate, original individuality considered as an inner means, or as
a transition from End to an achieved reality. But the actual means
and the real transition are the unity of talent with the nature
of the matter in hand, present in that interest: talent represents
in the means the side of action, interest the side of content; both
are individuality itself, as an interfusion of being and action.
What we have, therefore, is a set of given circumstances which
are in themselves the individual’s own original nature; next, the
interest which treats them as its own or as its End; and finally,
the union [of these] and the abolition of the antithesis in the
means. This union itself still falls within consciousness and the


INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF


241


whole just considered is one side of an antithesis. This illusory
appearance of an antithesis which still remains, is removed by
the transition or the means; for the means is a unity of inner
and outer, the antithesis of the specific character it has as an
inner means. It therefore rids itself of that character and posits
itself—this unity of action and being—equally as an outer , as
an individuality that has itself become a reality, i.e. an individu¬
ality which is posited for individuality itself as [objectively]
existent. In this way, the entire action does not go outside itself,
either as circumstances, or as End, or means, or as a work done.

402. But with ‘work done’ the difference of the original
natures seems to enter; the work, like the individual’s original
nature which it expresses, is something specific; for the nega¬
tivity implicit in action, being freely discharged by it as an
existent reality, is present in the action as a quality. Conscious¬
ness, however, as against the work, is determined as that in
which the quality is present as negativity in general, i.e. as action;
it is thus the universal as against the specific character of the
work done. It can therefore compare one work with another,
and by so doing grasp individualities themselves as different ; it
can regard an individual whose work is more wide-ranging as
possessing greater energy of will or a richer nature, i.e. a nature
whose native quality is less limited; and another, on the other
hand, as a weaker and poorer nature.

403. In contrast with this unessential quantitative difference,
‘good’ and ‘bad’ would express an absolute difference; but here
this is not in place. Whether something is held to be good or
bad, it is in either case an action and an activity in which an
individuality exhibits and expresses itself, and for that reason
it is all good; and it.would, strictly speaking, be impossible to
say what ‘badness’ was supposed to be. What would be called
a bad work is the individual life of a specific nature, which
therein gives itself reality. It would only be put down as a bad
work by a comparing reflection, which, however, is an idle
affair, since it goes beyond the essential nature of the work,
which is to be a self-expression of the individuality, and in it
looks for and demands something else, no one knows what. The
comparison could only have regard to the above-mentioned dif¬
ference. But this, being a quantitative difference, is in itself not
an essential one; and here, specifically, because the things


242


C. (AA.) REASON


compared would be different works or individualities. But these
have no connection with one another; each is purely self-
related. The original nature is alone the in-itself or what could
be laid down as a standard for judging the work, and con¬
versely. Both, however, correspond to each other: there is
nothing/or individuality which has not been made so by it, or
there is no reality which is not individuality’s own nature and
doing, and no action nor‘in-itself of individuality that is not
real; and only these moments are to be compared.

404. Therefore, feelings of exaltation, or lamentation, or
repentance are altogether out of place. For all that sort of thing
stems from a mind which imagines a content and an in-itself
which are different from the original nature of the individual
and the actual carrying-out of it in the real world. Whatever
it is that the individual does, and whatever happens to him,
that he has done himself, and he is that himself. He can have
only the consciousness of the simple transference of himself from
the night of possibility into the daylight of the present, from
the abstract in-itself into the significance of actual being, and can
have only the certainty that what happens to him in the latter
is nothing else but what lay dormant in the former. It is true
that the consciousness of this unity is likewise a comparison,
but what is compared is merely an illusory appearance of an
antithesis, an appearance of the form [of antithesis] which, for
se j£' consc * ous ^ eason that is aware that individuality in its own
^elfis reality, is nothing more than an illusory show. The indivi-

ual, therefore, knowing that in his actual world he can find
nothing else but its unity with himself, or only the certainty

o lmself in the truth of that world, can experience only joy in
himself

4 05 . This is the Notion which consciousness forms of itself,
of itself as an absolute interfusion of individuality and being.
Let us see whether this Notion is confirmed by experience, and
whether its reality corresponds to it. The work produced is the
reality which consciousness gives itself; it is that in which the
individual is explicitly for himself what he is implicitly or in
himself, and in such a manner that the consciousness, for which
the individual becomes explicit in the work, is not the particu¬
lar, but the universal, consciousness. In his work, he has placed
himself altogether in the element of universality, in the quality-


INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF


243


less void of being. The consciousness which withdraws from its
work is, in fact, the universal consciousness in contrast to its
work, which is determinate or particular —and it is universal
because it is absolute negativity or action in this antithesis. It
thus goes beyond itself in the work, and is itself the quality¬
less void which is left unfilled by its work. But if their unity
before was preserved in the Notion, this happened simply
because the work qua existent was sublated. But it is supposed
to exist , and we have to see how in its existence the individuality
will preserve its universality, and will know how to satisfy itself.

In the first place, we have to consider by itself the work pro¬
duced. It has received into itself the whole nature of the indivi¬
duality. Its being is therefore itself an action in which all dif¬
ferences interpenetrate and are dissolved. The work is thus
expelled into an existence in which the quality of the original
nature in fact turns against other determinate natures,
encroaches on them, and gets lost as a vanishing element in
this general process. Although within the Notion of the objectively
real individuality all the moments—circumstances, end,
means, and realization—have the same value, and the original
specific nature has the value of no more than a universal ele¬
ment, on the other hand, when this element becomes an objec¬
tive being, its specific character as such comes to light in the work
done, and obtains its truth in its dissolution. More precisely,
the form which this dissolution takes is that, in this specific
character, the individual, qua this particular individual, has
become aware of himself as actual; but the specific character
is not only the content of the reality, but equally its form; in
other words, the reality simply as such is just this quality of
being opposed to self-consciousness. Looked at from this aspect,
the reality is revealed as a reality that has vanished from the
Notion, and is merely an alien reality that is found given. The
work is , i.e. it exists for other individualities, and is for them
an alien reality, which they must replace by their own in order
to obtain through their action the consciousness of their unity
with reality; in other words, their interest in the work which
stems from their original nature, is something different from this
work’s own peculiar interest, which is thereby converted into
something different. Thus the work, is, in general, something
perishable, which is obliterated by the counter-action of other


244


C. (AA.) REASON


forces and interests, and really exhibits the reality of the indivi¬
duality as vanishing rather than as achieved.

406. Consciousness, then, in doing its work, is aware of the
antithesis of doing and being, which in the earlier shapes of con¬
sciousness was at the same time the beginning of action, while
here it is only a result. But in fact this antithesis was likewise
the foundation, in that consciousness proceeded to act as an
implicitly real individuality; for the action presupposed the spe¬
cific original nature as the in-itself of the individuality, and the
content of that nature was achievement simply for the sake of
achievement. Pure action, however, is a self-identical form with
which, therefore, the specific character of the original nature is
not in agreement. Here, as elsewhere, it is a matter of in¬
difference which of the two is called Notion and which reality.
The original nature has only an ideal existence, or is the in-
itself in contrast to the action in which it first becomes a reality;
or in other words, the original nature is the being both of the
individuality as such and of the individuality in the form of
work, while action is the original Notion as an absolute transi¬
tion, or as the coming-to-be [of the reality]. This disparity
between Notion and reality which lies in its essence, is learnt
by consciousness from experience in its work; in work, there¬
fore, consciousness becomes what it is in truth, and its empty
Notion of itself vanishes.

407. In this fundamental contradiction inherent in work—
which is the truth of this essentially real individuality—all the
aspects of the individuality thus appear again as contradictory;
that is to say, the work, qua the content of the whole individu¬
ality, when transferred from the^ozwgofit, which is the negative
unity holding captive all the moments of that content, now lets
the moments go free; and in the element of existence they
become indifferent to one another. Notion and reality are thus
separated into purpose, and that which is the original essenti¬
ality. It is accidental if the purpose has a truly essential nature,
or if the in-itself is made the purpose. Even so, Notion and
reality again fall apart as a transition to reality and as purpose ;
in other words, it is accidental if a means is chosen which
expresses the purpose. And finally the entirety of these inner
moments (whether they possess an inner unity or not), i.e. the
action of the individual, is again in an accidental relationship


INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF


245

to reality in general; fortune decides as well in favour of an ill-
disposed purpose and an ill-chosen means, as against them.

408. If, now, consciousness is thus made aware in its work
oftheflw^ 7 tewofwillingand achieving, between end and means,
and, again, between this inner nature in its entirety and reality
itself, an antithesis which in general includes within it the con¬
tingency of its action, yet the unity and necessity of the action
are no less present, too. The latter aspect overlaps the former,
and the experience of the contingency of the action is itself only
a contingent experience. The necessity of the action consists in
the fact that purpose is related simply to actuality , and this unity
is the Notion of action; action takes place because action is in
and for itself the essence of actuality. In the work, it is true,
there is revealed the contingency possessed by achievement
when contrasted with willing and doing; and this experience,
which seems as if it must be accepted as truth, contradicts that
Notion of action. If, however, we consider the content of this
experience in its completeness, it is seen to be the vanishing
work. What is preserved is not the vanishing: the vanishing is
itself actual and is bound up with the work and vanishes with
it; the negative itself perishes along with the positive whose
negative it is.

4 ° 9 - This vanishing of the vanishing lies in the Notion of the
intrinsically real individuality itself; for that in which the work
vanishes or what vanishes in the work, and what was supposed
to give experience, as it was called, its supremacy over individu¬
ality’s own Notion of itself, is the objective reality . Objective
reality, however, is a moment which itself no longer possesses
any truth on its own account in this consciousness; that truth
consists solely in the unity of this consciousness with the action,
and the true work is only that unity of doing and being , of willing
and achieving. Consciousness, then, because of the funda¬
mental certainty of its actions, holds the reality opposed to that
certainty to be for it alone; for self-consciousness which has
returned into itself, and for which all antithesis has vanished,
antithesis can no longer take this form of being/ar itself in anti¬
thesis to reality. On the contrary, then, the antithesis and the
negativity manifested in work affect not merely the content of
the work or the content of consciousness as well, but affect the
reality as such, and hence affect the antithesis present in that


2 4 6 C, (AA.) REASON

reality, and present only in virtue of it, and the vanishing of
the work. In this way, then, consciousness is reflected out of
its perishable work into itself, and preserves its Notion and its
certainty as what objectively exists and endures in face of the
experience of the contingency of action. It experiences in point
of fact its Notion, in which reality is only a moment, i.e. some¬
thing/or consciousness , not something which exists in its own
right; it experiences it as a vanishing moment, and reality there¬
fore has for consciousness only the value of being as such, whose
universality is one with action. This unity is the true work; it
is the very heart of the matter [die Sache selbst] which completely
holds its own and is experienced as that which endures , indepen¬
dently of what is merely the contingent result of an individual
action, the result of contingent circumstances, means, and
reality.

410. The ‘heart of the matter’ is only opposed to these
moments in so far as they are supposed to be isolated, but as
an interfusion of the reality and the individuality it is essentially
their unity. It is equally an action and, qua action, pure action
in general, hencejust as much an action of this particular indivi¬
dual; and this action as still his in antithesis to reality, is a pur¬
pose. Equally, it is the transition from this determinateness into
the opposite, and lastly it is a reality which is explicitly present
for consciousness. The ‘heart of the matter’ thus expresses the
spiritual essentiality in which all these moments have lost all
validity of their own, and are valid therefore only as universal,
and in which the certainty consciousness has of itself is an objec¬
tive entity, an objective fact for it, an object born of self-con¬
sciousness as its own, without ceasing to be a free object in the
proper sense. The Thing of sense-certainty and perception now
acquires its significance through self-consciousness and through
it alone, on this rests the distinction between a Thing and a
cause or a matter in hand’. A movement corresponding to that
from [sense-] certainty to perception will run its course here.

411. In the matter in hand’, then, in which the interfusion
of individuality and objectivity has itself become objective, self-
consciousness has come into possession of its true Notion, or has
attained to a consciousness of its substance. At the same time,
this consciousness as it exists here is one that has just now come
into being, and hence is an immediate consciousness of its sub-


INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF


247


stance; and this is the specific way in which spiritual being is
present here; it has not yet developed into a truly real sub¬
stance. The ‘matter in hand’ has, in this immediate conscious¬
ness of its substance, the form of simple essence which, as a uni¬
versal, contains within itself all its various moments and belongs
to them, but, again, is also indifferent to them as specific
moments, and is free and independent, and as this free, simple,
abstract ‘matter in hand’ has the value of essential being. The
various moments of the original determinateness or of the ‘mat¬
ter in hand’ of this particular individual, the moments of his
End, of the means, of the action itself, and of the reality, all
these are, on the one hand, single particular moments for this
consciousness, which, in comparison with the ‘matter in hand 5 ,
it can abandon and surrender. On the other hand, however,
they all have this ‘matter in hand’ as their essence but only in
such a way that it, being their abstract universal, can be found
in each of these various moments, and can be a predicate of them.
The ‘matter in hand’ is not yet a subject; but those moments
count as subject because they fall on the side of individuality in
general, whereas the ‘matter in hand’ is at first only the simple
universal. It is the genus which is found in all these moments
as species of itself, and is equally free and independent of them.

412. Consciousness is called honest when it has on the one
hand attained to the idealism which the ‘matter in hand’
expresses, and on the other hand possesses the truth in it qua
this formal universality; a consciousness which is concerned
solely with the ‘matter in hand’ and therefore busies itself solely
with the various moments or species of it; and when it does
not attain the ‘matter in hand’ in one of these moments or in
one meaning, it for that very reason gets hold of it in another.
Consequently, it does in fact always obtain the satisfaction
which it should enjoy in virtue of its Notion. Whichever way
things turn out, it has accomplished and attained the ‘matter
in hand’, for this being the universal genus of those moments
is the predicate of them all.

413. If this consciousness does not convert its purpose into
a reality, it has at least willed it, i.e. it makes the purpose qua
purpose, the mere doing which does nothing, the ‘heart of the
matter’, and can therefore explain and console itself with the
fact that all the same something was taken in hand and done.


C. (AA.) REASON


248

Since the universal itself contains subsumed under it the nega¬
tive moment or the vanishing, the fact that the work annihilates
itself, this too is its doing. It has incited the others to do this,
and in the vanishing of its reality still finds satisfaction, just like
naughty boys who enjoy themselves when they get their ears
boxed because they are the cause of its being done. Or, again,
suppose it has not even attempted to carry out the ‘matter in
hand’, and has done absolutely nothing, then it has not been
able to; the‘matter in hand’ is for it just the unity of its resolve
and the reality; it asserts that the reality would be nothing else
but what it was possible for it to do. Finally, suppose something
of interest to him has come his way without any effort on his
part, then for him this reality is the ‘matter in hand’just because
of the interest he finds in it, even though that reality has not
been produced by him. If it is a piece of good fortune that has
befallen him personally, then he is sure that it is his own doing
and his own desert; if, on the other hand, it should be an event
of historical importance which does not really concern him, he
makes it likewise his own; and an interest for which he has done
nothing is, in his own eyes, a party interest which he has
favoured or opposed, and even combated or supported.

414. The integrity of this consciousness, as well as the satisfac¬
tion it experiences in all its relationships, obviously consists in
the fact that it does not bring together its thoughts about the
‘matter in hand’. For it, the ‘matter in hand’ is as much its
own affair as not a work at all, or is a mere action and an empty
purpose, or even a reality involving no action at all; it makes
one meaning after another the subject of this predicate, and
forgets them one after another. Now, the ‘matter in hand’ in
being merely willed, or even in being incapable of realization,
has the meaning of an empty purpose and of a unity of willing
and achievement only in thought . The consolation for the failure
of the purpose which at least was willed , or at least simply done ,
as well as the satisfaction of having given others something to
do, makes simple doing, or thoroughly bad work, the essence
of the whole affair; for that work is to be called bad which is
no work at all. Finally, in the lucky event of finding the reality
already in being, this ‘being’ becomes without any effort the
‘matter in hand’ itself.

415. The truth about this integrity, however, is that it is not


INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF 249

as honest as it seems. For it cannot be so unthinking as to let
these various moments actually fall apart in that way; it must
be directly aware of their antithesis because they are absolutely
interrelated. The pure action is essentially the action of this par¬
ticular individual, and this action is equally essentially a reality
or a ‘matter in hand’. Conversely, the reality is essentially only
as his doing and as action in general as well; and his action is
at the same time only as action in general and so, too, as reality
in general. While, then, it seems to him that his concern is only
with the ‘matter in hand’ as an abstract reality, it is also a fact
that he is concerned with it as his own doing. But just because
he is concerned merely with being active and busy, he is not
really in earnest about it; he has only to do with some objective
matter and with one that is his own. Since, finally, he seems
to will only his own affair or his own action, it is again a matter
of dealing with an affair in general or with a reality that endures
in its own right.

416. Just as the ‘matter in hand’ itself and its moments
appear here as content , they are equally necessary, too, as forms
in consciousness. They appear as content only to vanish, each
making room for the other. They must therefore be present in
the character of superseded forms; but as such they are aspects
of consciousness itself. The ‘matter in hand’ is present as the in-
itself or the reflection into itself of consciousness; the supplant¬
ing of the moments by one another finds expression there, how¬
ever, in their being established in consciousness, not as they are
in themselves but only as existing for another consciousness.
One of the moments of the content is exposed by it to the light
of day and made manifest to others; but consciousness is at the
same time reflected back from it into itself and the opposite is
equally present within consciousness which retains it for itself
as its own. At the same time what occurs is not that one or other
of the moments is merely exposed, and another merely retained;
on the contrary, consciousness operates alternately with them,
for it must make one as well as another essential for itself and
for the others. The whole is the spontaneous interfusion of indivi¬
duality and the universal ; but because this whole is present for
consciousness only as the simple essence, and thus as the abstrac¬
tion, of the ‘matter in hand’ its separate moments fall apart
outside of that ‘matter in hand’ and of one another. As a whole,


250


C. (AA.) REASON

it is only exhaustively exhibited by alternately exposing its
moments and retaining them for itself. Since in this alternation
consciousness keeps, in its reflection, one moment for itself and
as essential, while another is only externally present in it, or
is for others , there thus enters a play of individualities with one
another in which each and all find themselves both deceiving
and deceived.

417. An individuality sets about carrying out something; by
so doing it seems to have made something its own affair; it acts,
and in acting becomes involved with others and seems to itself
to be having to do with reality. The others therefore take its
action for a sign of its interest in the ‘matter in hand’ as such,
and its purpose to be the carrying-out of the matter per se, re¬
gardless whether this is done by the first individuality or by
them. Accordingly, when they point out that this matter has
already been accomplished by them, or, if it has not, offer and
furnish their assistance, then this consciousness has really left
the position they believe it to occupy; it is its own action and
its own effort that constitute its interest in the ‘matter in hand’,
and when the others become aware that this was really the ‘mat¬
ter in hand,’ then they feel they have been deceived. But actu¬
ally their eagerness to come and help was itself nothing else but
a desire to see and exhibit their own action, not the matter in
hand itself; that is, they wanted to deceive the others in just
the same way that they complain of having been deceived.
Since it now turns out that its own action and effort, the play
of its own powers, is the ‘heart of the matter’, it seems that con¬
sciousness is occupied with its own interest, not with that of
others, and is anxious only about action as its own action, not
about action as the action of others, ancj hence seems to allow
the others to do as they like about the matter they have in hand.
But again they are mistaken; that consciousness has already left
the position they thought it occupied. It is not concerned with
the ‘matter in hand’ as its own particular affair, but simply as
a ‘matter in hand’, as a universal, which is for everyone. It inter¬
feres, therefore in the action and work of others, and, if it can
no longer take the work out of their hands, it at least shows
an interest in it by passing judgement on it; if it gives it the
stamp of its approval and praise, this is meant to imply that,
in the work, it praises not only the work itself, but also its own


INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF 251

generosity and moderation in not having damaged the work
as work, nor damaged it by its censure. In showing an interest
in the work, it is enjoying its own self; and the work which it
censures is equally welcome to it for just this enjoyment of its
own action which its censure provides. Those, however, who
think or pretend to think that they have been deceived by this
interference, wanted really themselves to practise the same kind
of deceit. They pretend that their action and efforts are some¬
thing for themselves alone in which they have only themselves
and their own essential nature in mind. However, in doing
something, and thus bringing themselves out into the light of
day, they directly contradict by their deed their pretence of
wanting to exclude the glare of publicity and participation by
all and sundry. Actualization is, on the contrary, a display of
what is one’s own in the element of universality whereby it
becomes, and should become, the affair of everyone.

418. It is, then, equally a deception of oneself and of others
if it is pretended that what one is concerned with is the f matter
in hand ’ alone. A consciousness that opens up a subject-matter
soon learns that others hurry along like flies to freshly poured-
out milk, and want to busy themselves with it; and they learn
about that individual that he, too, is concerned with the sub¬
ject-matter, not as an object , but as his own affair. On the other
hand, if what is supposed to be essential is merely the doing
of it, the employment of powers and capacities, or the expres¬
sion of this particular individuality, then equally it is learned
by all parties that they all regard themselves as affected and
invited to participate, and instead of a mere ‘doing’, or separate
action, peculiar to the individual who opened up the subject-
matter, something has been opened up that is for others as well,
or is a subject-matter on its own account. In both cases the same
thing happens and only has a different significance by contrast
with what was assumed and was supposed to be accepted. Con¬
sciousness experiences both sides as equally essential moments,
and in doing so learns what the nature of the ‘matter in hand 9 really
is, viz. that it is neither merely something which stands opposed
to action in general, and to individual action, nor action which
stands opposed to a continuing being and which would be the
free genus of these moments as its species. Rather is its nature
such that its being is the action of the single individual and of


252 C. (AA.) REASON

all individuals and whose action is immediately for others , or
is a ‘matter in hand 5 and is such only as the action of each and
everyone : the essence which is the essence of all beings, viz. spiri¬
tual essence. Consciousness learns that no one of these moments
is subject, but rather gets dissolved in the universal ‘matter in hand ’;
the moments of the individuality which this unthinking con¬
sciousness regarded as subject, one after the other, coalesce into
simple individuality, which, as this particular individuality, is
no less immediately universal. Thus the ‘matter in hand’ no
longer has the character of a predicate, and loses the character¬
istic of lifeless abstract universality. It is rather substance per¬
meated by individuality, subject in which there is individuality
just as much qua individual, or qua this particular individual, as
qua all individuals; and it is the universal which has being only
as this action of all and each, and a reality in the fact that this
particular consciousness knows it to be its own individual reality
and the reality of all. The pure ‘matter in hand’ itself is what
was defined above as ‘the category’, being that is the ‘I’ or
the ‘I’ that is being, but in the form of thought which is still distin¬
guished from actual self-consciousness. Here, however, the
moments of actual self-consciousness in so far as we call them
its content (purpose, action, and reality), and also in so far as
we call them its form (being-for-self and being-for-another), are
posited as one with the simple category itself, and the category
is thereby at the same time the entire content.

b. Reason as lawgiver

419. Spiritual essence is, in its simple being, pure consciousness,
and this self- consciousness. The originally determinate nature of
the individual has lost its positive meaning of being in itself the
element and the purpose of its activity ;.it is merely a superseded
moment, and the individual is a self in the form of a universal
self. Conversely, the formal ‘matter in hand’ gets its filling from
the active, self-differentiating individuality; for the differences
within the latter constitute the content of that universal. The
category is in itself or implicit, as the universal of pure conscious¬
ness ; it is equally/or itself or explicit, for the self of consciousness
is equally a moment of it. It is absolute being, for that uni¬
versality is the simple self-identity of being.

420. Thus what is object for consciousness has the signifi-


INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF


253


cance of being the True; it is and it is authoritative, in the sense
that it exists and is authoritative in and for itself. It is the absolute
‘matter in hand’, which no longer suffers from the antithesis
of certainty and its truth, between universal and individual,
between purpose and its reality, but whose existence is the reality
and action of self-consciousness. This ‘matter in hand’ is therefore
the ethical substance ; and consciousness of it is the ethical con¬
sciousness. Its object is likewise for it the True, for it combines
self-consciousness and being in a single unity. It has the value
of the Absolute , for self-consciousness cannot and does not want
any more to go beyond this object, for in it, it is in communion
with* itself: it cannot, for it is all being and all power; it does
not want to, for it is the self or the will of this self. The object
is in its own self real as object, for it contains within itself the
distinction characteristic of consciousness; it divides itself into
‘masses’ \Massen\ or spheres which are the determinate laws of
the absolute essence. These ‘masses’, however, do not obscure
the Notion, for the moments of being and pure consciousness
and of the self remain enclosed within it—a unity which con¬
stitutes the essence of these ‘masses’ and which, in this dis¬
tinction, no longer lets these moments fall apart from one
another.

421. These laws or ‘masses’ of the ethical substance are im¬
mediately acknowledged. We cannot ask for their origin and
justification, nor can we look for any other warrant; for some¬
thing other than essence that is in and for itself could only be
self-consciousness itself. But self-consciousness is nothing but
this essence, for it is itself the being-for self of this essence which
is the truth, just because it is as much the self of consciousness
as it is its in-itself or pure consciousness.

422. Since self-consciousness knows itself to be a moment of
the being-for-self of this substance, it expresses the existence of
the law within itself as follows: sound Reason knows imme¬
diately what is right and good. Just as it knows the law imme¬
diately, so too the law is valid for it immediately, and it says
directly: ‘this is right and good’—and, moreover, this particular
law. The laws are determinate', the law is the ‘matter in hand’
itself filled with a significant content.

423. What is thus given immediately must likewise be
accepted and considered immediately. Just as in the case of


254


C. (AA.) REASON

sense-certainty, we had to examine the nature of what it imme¬
diately expressed as being , so here, too, we have to see how the
being expressed by this immediate ethical certainty, or by the
immediately existing ‘masses’ of the ethical substance, is con¬
stituted. Examples ofsome such laws will show us this; and since
we take them in the form of declarations of the sound Reason
which knows them, we do not have first to introduce the moment
which has to be made valid in them, considered as immediate
ethical laws.

424. ‘Everyone ought to speak the truth.’ In this duty as
expressed unconditionally, the condition will at once be
admitted : if he knows the truth. The commandment, then, will
now run: everyone ought to speak the truth at all times, accord¬
ing to his knowledge and conviction. Sound Reason, this ethical
Substance precisely, which knows immediately what is right
and good, will also explain that this condition was already so
much part and parcel of that universal maxim that this is how
it meant that commandment to be understood. But, with this
admission, it in fact admits that already, in the very act of
saying the commandment, it really violates it. It said : everyone
ought to speak the truth; but it meant : he ought to speak it
according to his knowledge and conviction; that is to say, what
it said was different from what it meant; and to speak otherwise
than one means, means not speaking the truth. The untruth
or inapt expression in its improved form now runs: everyone
ought to speak the truth according to his knowledge and con¬
viction at the time. But with this correction, what the proposi¬
tion wanted to enunciate as universally necessary and intrinsic¬
ally valid, has really turned round into something completely
contingent. For speaking the truth is made contingent on
whether I can know it, and can convince myself of it; and the
proposition says nothing more than that a confused muddle of
truth and falsehood ought to be spoken just as anyone happens
to know, mean, and understand it. This contingency of the con¬
tent has universality merely in the propositional form in which
it is expressed; but as an ethical proposition it promises a uni¬
versal and necessary content , and thus contradicts itself by the
content being contingent. Finally, if the proposition were recti¬
fied by saying that the contingency of the knowledge and convic¬
tion of the truth ought to be dropped, and that the truth ought




INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF


255


also to be known , then this would be a commandment which
directly contradicts the one we started from. Sound Reason was
at first supposed to possess immediately the capacity to speak the
truth; now, however, it is said that it ought to know , that is to
say, that it does not immediately know what is true. Looking at
this from the side of the content, then this has dropped out in
the demand that we should know the truth; for this refers to
knowing in general : we ought to know. What is demanded is, there¬
fore, really something free of all specific content. But here the
point in question was about a specific content, a distinction in the
ethical substance. Yet this immediate determination of the sub¬
stance is a content which showed itself to be really completely
contingent and which, when raised into universality and
necessity by making the law refer to knowing [instead of to con¬
tent ], in fact vanishes.

425. Another celebrated commandment is: ‘Love thy
neighbour as thyself.’ It is directed to the individual in his rela¬
tionship with other individuals and asserts the commandment
as a relationship between two individuals, or as a relationship
of feeling Active love—for love that does not act has no exist¬
ence and is therefore hardly intended here—aims at removing
an evil from someone and being good to him. For this purpose
I have to distinguish what is bad for him, what is the appropri¬
ate good to counter this evil, and what in general is good for
him; i.e. I must love him intelligently. Unintelligent love will
perhaps do him more harm than hatred. Intelligent, substantial
beneficence is, however, in its richest and most important form
the intelligent universal action of the state—an action com¬
pared with which the action of a single individual, as an indivi¬
dual, is so insignificant that it is hardly worth talking about.
The action of the state is, moreover, of so great a power that,
ifthe action of the individual were to oppose it, and either were
intended to be a downright, explicitly criminal act, or the in¬
dividual out of love for someone else wanted to cheat the uni¬
versal out of its right, and its share in the action, such an action
would be altogether useless and inevitably frustrated. The only
significance left for beneficence, which is a sentiment , is that of
an action which isquitesingle and isolated, of help in [a situation
of) need, which is as contingent as it is transitory. Chance deter¬
mines not only the occasion of the action but also whether it


256


C. (AA.) REASON


is a ‘work’ at all, whether it is not immediately undone and
even perverted into something bad. Thus this acting for the
good of others which is said to be necessary , is of such kind that
it may, or may not, exist; is such that, if by chance the occasion
offers, the action is perhaps a ‘work’ and is good, but also per¬
haps not. This law, therefore, as little has a universal content
as the one we first considered, and does not express, as an abso¬
lute ethical law should, something that is valid in and for itself.
In other words, such laws stop short at Ought, they have no
actuality; they are not laws, but merely commandments.

426. It is evident, however, from the very nature of the case,
that we must give up all idea of a universal, absolute content.
For any determinateness placed in the simple substance (whose
nature is to be simple) is inadequate to it. The commandment
in its simple absoluteness itself expresses an immediate ethical
being ; the distinction appearing in it is a determinateness, and
therefore a content subsumed under the absolute universality
of this simple being. Since, then, all idea of an absolute content
must be given up, it can only claim a formal universality, or
that it is not self-contradictory. For universality that lacks a
content is [merely] formal, and an absolute content itself is tanta¬
mount to a distinction which is no distinction, i.e. to absence
of content.

427. All that is left, then, for the making of a law is the mere
form of universality, or, in fact, the tautology of consciousness
which stands over against the content, and the knowledge, not
of an existing or a real content, but only of the essence or self-
identity of a content.

428. The ethical nature, therefore, is not itself simply as such
a content, but only a standard for deciding whether a content
is capable of being a law or not, i.e. whether it is or is not self¬
contradictory. Reason as the giver of laws is reduced to a
Reason which merely critically examines them.

c. Reason as testing laws

429. A distinction within the simple ethical substance is for
it an accident which appeared, as we saw in specific command¬
ments, as the contingency of the knowledge [cf the circum¬
stances], of the circumstances themselves, and of the action.
The comparison of that simple being with the determinateness


INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF


257


corresponding to it was made by us; and in that comparison
the simple substance has shown itself to be a formal universality,
or pure consciousness which is free from the content and stands
over against it, and is a knowing of it as something determinate.
This universality in this way remains the same as what the ‘mat¬
ter in hand’ itself was. But in consciousness it is something else;
it is, namely, no longer the unthinking, inert genus, but is
related to the particular and regarded as the power over it and
as its truth. This consciousness seems at first to be the same pro¬
cess of testing which formerly we carried out, and it seems that
its action cannot be anything other than what has already hap¬
pened, viz. a comparison of the universal with the determinate
particular which, as previously, would reveal their disparity.
Here, however, the relationship of the content to the universal
is different, since the latter has acquired a different significance;
it is a formal universality of which the determinate content is
capable, for in that universality the content is considered only
in relation to itself. When we were testing, the universal pure
substance stood over against the determinateness, which dis¬
played itself as a contingency of the consciousness into which
the substance entered. Here,, one term of the comparison has
vanished; the universal is no longer the affirmatively present
and authoritative substance, or that which is right in and for
itself, but a simple knowing or a form, which compares a con¬
tent only with itself, and considers whether it is a tautology.
Laws are no longer given, but tested ; and for the consciousness
which tests them they are already given. It takes up their content
simply as it is, without concerning itself, as we did, with the
particularity and contingency inherent in its reality; it is con¬
cerned with the commandment simply as commandment, and
its attitude towards it is just as uncomplicated as is its being
a criterion for testing it.

430. But that is the reason why this testing does not get very
far. Just because the criterion is a tautology, and indifferent
to the content, one content is just as acceptable to it as its oppo¬
site. Suppose the question is: Ought it to be an absolute law
that there should be property? Absolute, and not on grounds
of utility for other ends: the essence of ethics consists just in
law being identical with itself and through this self-identity,
i.e. through having its ground in itself, it is unconditioned.


C. (AA.) REASON


258

Property, simply as such, does not contradict itself; it is an iso¬
lated determinateness, oris posited as merely self-identical. Non¬
property, the non-ownership of things, or a common ownership
of goods, is just as little self-contradictory. That something
belongs to nobody, or to the first-comer who takes possession
of it, or to all together, to each according to his need or in equal
portions—that is a simple determinateness, aformal thought, like
its opposite, property. Admittedly, if a thing that belongs to
no one is considered as a necessary object of a need , then it is neces¬
sary that it become the property of some particular individual;
and the contradiction would stem rather from the freedom of
the thing being made into a law. But by non-ownership of the
thing is not meant absolute non-ownership, but that it shall
come into someone’s possession according to the individual’s
need, and, moreover, not in order to be kept, but to be used
immediately. But to provide for the need in such a completely
arbitrary way is contradictory to the nature of the conscious
individual who alone is under discussion. For such an indivi¬
dual must think of his need in the form of universality , must pro¬
vide for the whole of his existence, and acquire a lasting posses¬
sion. This being so, the idea of a thing being arbitrarily allotted
to the first self-conscious individual who comes along and needs
it, does not accord with itself. In a society based on a common
ownership of goods, in which provision would be made in ac¬
cordance with a universal fixed rule, either each receives as
much as he needs —in which case there is a contradiction
between this inequality and the essential nature of that con¬
sciousness whose principle is the equality of individuals—or, in
accordance with that principle, goods will be equally distri¬
buted, and in this case the share is not related to the need,
although such a relationship alone constitutes the very notion
of ‘sharing’.

431. Still, if in this way [the notion of] non-property appears
contradictory, this is only because it has not been left as a simple
determinateness. The same applies to [the notion of] property,
if this is resolved into its moments. The single thing that is my
property is held as such to be something universal, solidly estab¬
lished, and permanent; but this contradicts its nature, which
consists in its being used and in vanishing. At the same time,
it is held to be mine, something which everyone else acknowledges,


INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF


259


and lets alone. The fact, however, that I am acknowledged
implies rather my equality, my identity, with everyone, and
that is the opposite of exclusiveness. What I possess is a Thing,
i.e. something which is for others in general and is only for me
in a quite general, undefined way; that I possess it, contradicts
its universal thinghood. Consequently, property is just as much
an all-round contradiction as non-property; each contains
within it these two opposed, self-contradictory moments of in¬
dividuality and universality. But each of these determina¬
tenesses when thought of as simple , as property or non-property,
without explicating them further, is as simple as the other, i.e.
is not self-contradictory. The criterion of law which Reason pos¬
sesses within itself fits every case equally well, and is thus in
fact no criterion at all. It would be strange, too, if tautology,
the maxim of contradiction, which is admitted to be only a
formal criterion for the cognition of theoretical truth, i.e. some¬
thing which is quite indifferent to truth and falsehood, were
supposed to be more than this for the cognition of practical
truth.

432. In both the above moments, which fill the former
emptiness of spiritual being, the process of placing immediate
determinatenesses in the ethical substance, and then getting to
know whether they are laws, has been eliminated. The result
therefore seems to be that neither specific laws nor a knowledge
of them is admissible. But the substance is the consciousness of
itself as absolutely essential being, which, therefore, can give
up neither the distinction within it nor the knowledge of that dis¬
tinction. That law-giving and the testing of laws have proved
to be futile, means that both, when taken singly and in isolation,
are merely unstable moments of the ethical consciousness; and
the movement in which they appear has the formal meaning
that the ethical substance thereby exhibits itself as consciousness.

433. In so far as these two moments are more precise deter¬
minations of consciousness of the ‘ matter in hand\ they can be
regarded as forms of the honest consciousness which, as previ¬
ously in the case of its formal moments, now busies itself with
a supposed content of the good and the right, and with testing
such established truth, and fancies that in sound Reason and
intelligent insight it possesses that which gives force and validity
to commandments.


26 o


C. (AA.) REASON

434. However, without this honesty, laws do not have
validity as the essence of consciousness, nor, similarly, does the
testing of them count as an action within consciousness. On the
contrary, these moments, appearing each by itself immediately
as a reality , express in the one case an invalid establishing and
existence of actual laws, and in the other case an equally invalid
immunity from them. The law, as a specific law, has a contin¬
gent content; this means here that it is the law of a single con¬
sciousness and has an arbitrary content. To legislate imme¬
diately in that way is thus the tyrannical insolence which makes
caprice into a law and ethical behaviour into obedience to such
caprice—obedience to laws which are merely laws and not at
the same time commandments , So, too, the second moment, in
so far as it is isolated, means testing the laws, moving the im¬
movable, means the insolence of a knowledge which argues
itself into a freedom from absolute laws, treating them as an
alien caprice.

435. In both forms, these moments are a negative relation
to substance or real spiritual being; or we may say that in them
substance does not as yet possess its reality, but rather that con¬
sciousness contains them still in the form of its own immediacy,
and that substance is at first only a willing and knowing by this
particular individual, or the ‘ought to be’ of an unreal com¬
mandment and a knowledge of formal universality. But since
these modes have been superseded, consciousness has returned
into the universal and those antitheses have vanished. Spiritual
being is actual substance through these modes being valid, not
in isolation, but only as superseded [moments]; and the unity
in which they are merely moments is the self of consciousness
which, being from now on posited in the spiritual being, makes
that being actual, full-filled, and self-conscious.

436. The spiritual being thus exists first of all for self-con¬
sciousness as law which has an intrinsic being; the universality
associated with testing the law, a merely formal, not an essential
universality, is now behind us. The law is equally an eternal
law which is grounded not in the will of a particular individual,
but is valid in and for itself; it is the absolute pure will of all
which has the form of immediate being. Also, it is not a com¬
mandment , which only ought to be: it is and is valid ; it is the uni¬
versal I of the category, the‘I’which is immediately a reality,


26 i


INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF

and the world is only this reality. But since this existent law
is valid unconditionally, the obedience of self-consciousness is
not the serving of a master whose commands were arbitrary,
and in which it would not recognize itself. On the contrary,
laws are the thoughts of its own absolute consciousness,
thoughts which are immediately its own . Also, it does not believe
in them, for although belief does perceive essential being
it perceives it as something alien to itself. Ethical self- con¬
sciousness is immediately one with essential being through the
universality of its self belief, on the other hand, starts from the
individual consciousness; it is the movement of that consciousness
always towards this unity, but without attaining to the presence
of its essential being. The above consciousness, on the other
hand, has put its merely individual aspect behind it, this media¬
tion is finished and complete, and only because this is so, is this
consciousness immediate self-consciousness of the ethical sub¬
stance.

437. The difference between self-consciousness and essence,
is therefore, perfectly transparent. Because of this, the dis¬
tinctions in essence itself are not accidental determinatenesses;
on the contrary, in virtue of the unity of essence and self-con¬
sciousness (this latter being the only possible source of dis¬
parity), they are ‘masses’ articulated into groups by the life of
the unity which permeates them, unalienated spirits trans¬
parent to themselves, stainless celestial figures that preserve in
all their differences the undefiled innocence and harmony of
their essential nature. The relationship of self-consciousness to
them is equally simple and clear. They are , and nothing more;
this is what constitutes the awareness of its relationship to them.
Thus, Sophocles’ Antigone 1 acknowledges them as the unwritten
and infallible law of the gods.

They are not of yesterday or today, but everlasting,

Though where they came from, none of us can tell.

They are. If I inquire after their origin and confine them to
the point whence they arose, then I have transcended them;
for now it is I who am the universal, and they are the conditioned
and limited. If they are supposed to be validated by my insight,
then I have already denied their unshakeable, intrinsic being,

1 Sophocles, Antigone, 11 . 456-7.


262


c. (AA.) REASON


and regard them as something which, for me, is perhaps true,
but also is perhaps not true. Ethical disposition consists just in
sticking steadfastly to what is right, and abstaining from all
attempts to move or shake it, or derive it. Suppose something
has been entrusted to me; it is the property of someone else
and I acknowledge this because it is so , and I keep myself un¬
falteringly in this relationship. If I should keep for myself what
is entrusted to me, then according to the principle I follow in
testing laws, which is a tautology, I am not in the least guilty
of contradiction; for then I no longer look upon it as the prop¬
erty of someone else: to hold on to something which I do not
regard as belonging to someone else is perfectly consistent.
Alteration of the point of view is not contradiction; for what we
are concerned with is not the point of view, but the object an
content, which ought not to be self-contradictory. Just as 1
can—as I do when I give something away—alter the view that
it is my property into the view that it belongs to someone else,
without becoming guilty of a contradiction, so I can equally
pursue the reverse course. It is not, therefore, because I find
something is not self-contradictory that it is right; on the con¬
trary, it is right because it is what is right. That something is
the property of another, this is fundamental; I have not to argue
about it, or hunt around for or entertain thoughts, connections,
aspects, of various kinds; I have to think neither of making laws
nor of testing them. All such thinking on my part would upset
that relation, since, if I liked, I could in fact just as well make
the opposite conform to my indeterminate tautological know¬
ledge and make that the law. But whether this or the opposite
determination is the right, that is determined in and for itself
I could make whichever of them I liked the law, and just as
well neither of them, and as soon as I start to test them I have
already begun to tread an unethical path. By acknowledging
the absoluteness of the right, I am within the ethical substance;
and this substance is thus the essence of self-consciousness. But
this self-consciousness is the actuality and existence of the sub¬
stance, its self and its will.


(BB.) SPIRIT
