VI. SPIRIT

438. Reason is Spirit when its certainty of being all reality
has been raised to truth, and it is conscious of itself as its own
world, and of the world as itself. The coming-to-be of Spirit
was indicated in the immediately preceding movement in
which the object of consciousness, the pure category, rose to
be the Notion of Reason. In Reason as observer , this pure unity of
the / and being , of being/or itself and being in itself,\ is determined
as the in-itself or as being , and the consciousness of Reason finds
itself. But the truth of observation is rather that it leaves behind
it this immediate instinct which merely finds Reason, this un¬
conscious existence of Reason. The intuited category , the found
Thing , enters consciousness as the beingfor-self of the T, which
is now aware of itself as the self in objective being. But this deter¬
mination of the category, of being-for-self opposed to being-
in-itself, is equally one-sided and is a moment that supersedes
itself. The category is therefore determined for consciousness
as it is in its universal truth, as a being that is in and for itself
This still abstract determination which constitutes the ‘matter
in hand’ itself is at first only spiritual essence, and its conscious¬
ness [only] a formal knowing of it, which busies itself with all
kinds of content of the essence. This consciousness, as a particu¬
lar individual, is still in fact distinct from substance, and
either makes arbitrary laws or fancies that in simply know¬
ing laws it possesses them in their own absolute nature. Or,
looked at from the side of substance, this is spiritual essence that
is in and for itself, but which is not yet consciousness of itself. But
essence that is in and for itself and which is at the same time
actual as consciousness and aware of itself, this is Spirit.

439. Its spiritual essence has already been designated as ethi¬
cal substance ; but Spirit is the actuality of that substance. It is
the self of actual consciousness to which it stands opposed, or
rather which it opposes to itself as an objective, actual world ,
but a world which has completely lost the meaning for the self


264


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


of something alien to it, just as the self has completely lost the
meaning of a being-for-self separated from the world whether
dependent on it or not. Spirit, being the substance and the uni¬
versal, self-identical, and abiding essence, is the unmoved solid
ground and starting-point for the action of all, and it is their pur¬
pose and goal, the in-itselfof every self-consciousness expressed
in thought. This substance is equally the universal work pro¬
duced by the action of all and each as their unity and identity,
for it is the being-for-self, the self, action. As substance, Spirit is
unshaken righteous self-identity; but as being-for-self it is a frag¬
mented being, self-sacrificing and benevolent, in which each
accomplishes his own work, rends asunder the universal being,
and takes from it his own share. This resolving of the essence
into individuals is precisely the moment of the action and the
self of all; it is the movement and soul of substance and the
resultant universal being. Just because it is a being that is
resolved in the self, it is not a dead essence, but is actual and
alive. . .

440. Spirit is thus self-supporting, absolute, real being. All
previous shapes of consciousness are abstract forms of it. They
result from Spirit analysing itself, distinguishing its moments,
and dwelling for a while with each. This isolating of those
moments presupposes Spirit itself and subsists therein; in other
words, the isolation exists only in Spirit which is a concrete ex¬
istence. In this isolation they have the appearance of really
existing as such; but that they are only moments or vanishing
quantities is shown by their advance and retreat into their
ground and essence; and this essence is just this movement and
resolution of these moments. Here, where Spirit, or Spirit s re¬
flection into itself, is posited, we may briefly recall this aspect
of them in our own reflection: they were consciousness, self-
consciousness, and Reason. Spirit, then is consciousness in
general which embraces sense-certainty, perception, and the
Understanding, in so far as in its self-analysis Spirit holds fast
to the moment of being an objectively existent actuality to itself,
and ignores the fact that this actuality is its own being-for-self.
If, on the contrary, it holds fast to the other moment of the
analysis, viz. that its object is its own being-for-self, then it is
self-consciousness. But as immediate consciousness of the being
that is in and for itself, as unity of consciousness and self-con-


SPIRIT


265

sciousness, Spirit is consciousness that has Reason ; it is conscious¬
ness which, as the word ‘has’ indicates, has the object in a shape
which is implicitly determined by Reason or by the value of the
category, but in such a way that it does not as yet have for
consciousness the value of the category. Spirit is that conscious¬
ness which we were considering immediately prior to the
present stage. Finally, when this Reason which Spirit has is in¬
tuited by Spirit as Reason that exists , or as Reason that is actual
in Spirit and is its world, then Spirit exists in its truth; it is
Spirit, the ethical essence that has an actual existence.

441. Spirit is the ethical life of a nation in so far as it is the
immediate truth —the individual that is a world. It must advance
to the consciousness of what it is immediately, must leave
behind it the beauty of ethical life, and by passing through a
series of shapes attain to a knowledge of itself. These shapes,
however, are distinguished from the previous ones by the fact
that they are real Spirits, actualities in the strict meaning of
the word, and instead of being shapes merely of consciousness,
are shapes of a world.

442. The living ethical world is Spirit in its truth. When Spirit
first arrives at an abstract knowledge of its essence, ethical life
is submerged in the formal universality of legality or law. Spirit,
which henceforth is divided within itself, traces one of its worlds,
the realm of culture , in the harsh reality of its objective element;
over against this realm, it traces in the element of thought the
world of belief or faith , the realm of essential being. Both worlds,
however, when grasped by Spirit—which, after this loss of itself,
withdraws into itself—when grasped by the Notion , are con¬
founded and revolutionized by the insight [of the individual]
and the diffusion of that insight, known as the Enlightenment;
and the realm which was divided and expanded into this world
and the beyond , returns into self-consciousness which now, in
the form of morality, grasps itself as the essentiality and essence
as the actual self; it no longer places its world and its ground out¬
side of itself, but lets everything fade into itself, and, as conscience ,
is Spirit that is certain of itself.

443. The ethical world, the world which is rent asunder into
this world and a beyond, and the moral view of the world,
are thus the Spirits whose process and return into the simple
^//'-consciousness of Spirit are now to be developed. The goal


266


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


and outcome of that process will appear on the scene as the
actual self-consciousness of absolute Spirit.
