A. THE TRUE SPIRIT. THE ETHICAL ORDER

444. Spirit is, in its simple truth, consciousness, and forces
its moments apart. Action divides it into substance, and con¬
sciousness of the substance; and divides the substance as well
as consciousness. Substance, as the universal essence and End,
stands over against the individualized reality; the infinite middle
term is self-consciousness which, being the implicit unity of itself
and substance, now becomes that unity explicitly and unites
the universal essence and its individualized reality. The latter
it raises to the former and acts ethically , the former it brings
down to the latter and realizes the End, the substance which
had an existence only in thought. It brings into existence the
unity of its self and substance as its own work, and thus as an
actual existence.

445. In this separation of the moments of consciousness, the
simple substance has, on the one hand, preserved the antithesis
to self-consciousness, and on the other, it equally exhibits in
its own self the nature of consciousness, viz. to create distinctions
within itself, exhibiting itself as a world articulated into its
[separate] spheres. It thus splits itself up into distinct ethical
substances, into a human and a divine law. Similarly, the self-
consciousness confronting the substance assigns to itself accord¬
ing to its nature one of these powers, and as a knowing, is on
the one hand ignorant of what it does, and on the other knows
what it does, a knowledge which for that reason is a deceptive
knowledge. It learns through its own act the contradiction of
those powers into which the substance divided itself and their
mutual downfall, as well as the contradiction between its know¬
ledge of the ethical character of its action, and what is in its
own proper nature ethical, and thus finds its own downfall. In
point of fact, however, the ethical substance has developed
through this process into actual self-consciousness; in other
words, this particular self has become the actuality of what it
is in essence; but precisely in this development the ethical order
has been destroyed.


THE ETHICAL ORDER


267


a. The ethical world. Human and Divine Law: Man and Woman

446. The simple substance of Spirit, as consciousness, is
divided. In other words, just as the consciousness of abstract
sensuous being passes over into perception, so also does the im¬
mediate certainty ofa real ethical situation; and just as for sense-
perception simple being becomes a Thing of many properties,
so for ethical perception a given action is an actual situation
with many ethical connections. For the former, however, the
superfluous plurality of properties concentrates itself into the
essential antithesis of individuality and universality; and still
more for ethical perception, which is the purified substantial
consciousness, does the plurality of ethical moments become the
duality ofa law of individuality and a law of universality. But
each of these divisions of substance remains Spirit in its entirety;
if in sense-perception things have no other substance than the
two determinations of individuality and universality, here these
determinations express only the superficial antithesis of the two
sides.

447. In the essence we are considering here, individuality
has the meaning of self-consciousness in general, not of a particu¬
lar, contingent consciousness. In this determination, therefore,
the ethical substance is actual substance, absolute Spirit realized
in the plurality of existent consciousnesses; this spirit is the com¬
munity which, when we entered the sphere of Reason in its
practical embodiment, was for us absolute essence, and here has
emerged on its own account in its truth as conscious ethical essence,
and as essence for the consciousness which here is our object.
It is Spirit which is for itself in that it preserves itself in its reflec¬
tion in individuals; and it is implicitly Spirit, or substance, in
that it preserves them within itself. As actual substance , it is a
nation, as actual consciousness , it is the citizens of that nation. This
consciousness has its essence in simple Spirit, and the certainty
of itself in the actuality of this Spirit, in the nation as a whole;
it has its truth, therefore, not in something that is not actual,
but in a Spirit that exists and prevails.

448. This Spirit can be called the human law, because it is
essentially in the form of a reality that is conscious of itself. In
the form of universality it is the known law, and the prevailing
custom; in the form of individuality it is the actual certainty


268 C. (BB.) SPIRIT

of itself in the individual as such, and the certainty of itself as
a simple individuality is that Spirit as government. Its truth
is the authority which is openly accepted and manifest to all;
a concrete existence which appears for immediate certainty in the
form an existence that has freely issued forth.

449. Confronting this clearly manifest ethical power there
is, however, another power, the Divine Law. For the ethical
power of the state, being the movement of self-conscious action,
finds its antithesis in the simple and immediate essence of the
ethical sphere; as actual universality it is a force actively opposed
to individual being-for-self; and as actuality in general it finds
in that inner essence something other than the ethical power o
the state.

450. It has already been mentioned that each of the oppo¬
sites in which the ethical substance exists contains the entire
substance, and all the moments of its content. If, then, the com¬
munity is that substance conscious of what it actually does, the
other side has the form of immediate substance or substance
that simply is. The latter is thus on the one hand the inner
Notion or general possibility of the ethical sphere in general,
but on the other hand equally contains within it the moment
of self-consciousness. This moment which expresses the ethical
sphere in this element ofimmediacy or [simple] being, or which
is an immediate consciousness of itself, both as essence and as this
particular self, in an ‘other’, i.e. as a natural ethical com¬
munity—this is the Family. The Family, as the unconscious , still
inner Notion [of the ethical order], stands opposed to its actual,
self-conscious existence; as the element of the nation’s actual ex¬
istence, it stands opposed to the nation itself; as the immediate
being of the ethical order, it stands over against that order
which shapes and maintains itself by working for the universal;
the Penates stand opposed to the universal Spirit.

451. However, although the Family is immediately deter¬
mined as an ethical being, it is within itself an ethical entity only
so far as it is not the natural relationship of its members, or so
far as their connection is an immediate connection of separate,
actual individuals; for the ethical principle is intrinsically uni¬
versal, and this natural relationship is just as much a spiritual
one, and it is only as a spiritual entity that it is ethical. We
have to see what constitutes its peculiar ethical character. In


THE ETHICAL ORDER


269


the first place, because the ethical principle is intrinsically uni¬
versal, the ethical connection between the members of the
Family is not that of feeling, or the relationship of love. It seems,
then, that the ethical principle must be placed in the relation
of the individual member of the Family to the whole Family as
the Substance, so that the End and content of what he does and
actually is, is solely the Family. But the conscious End motivat¬
ing the action of this whole, so far as it is directed towards that
whole, is itself the individual. The acquisition and maintenance
of power and wealth is in part concerned only with needs and
belongs to the sphere of appetite; in part, they become in their
higher determination something that is only mediated. This de¬
termination does not fall within the Family itself, but bears on
what is truly universal, the community; it has, rather, a nega¬
tive relation to the Family, and consists in expelling the indivi¬
dual from the Family, subduing the natural aspect and
separateness of his existence, and training him to be virtuous,
to a life in and for the universal. The positive End peculiar to
the Family is the individual as such. Now, in order that this
relationship be ethical, neither he who performs the action, nor
he to whom the action refers, can be in an accidental relationship
as happens perhaps in rendering some assistance or service in
a particular case. The content of the ethical action must be sub¬
stantial or whole and universal; therefore it can only be related
to the whole individual or to the individual qua universal. And
this, again, must not be understood as if it were only imagined
that doing him a service would promote his total happiness,
whereas the service, being an immediate and actual deed, pro¬
duces only a particular effect on him. Nor must we imagine
that service in the form of education, i.e. in a series of efforts,
really has him in his entirety for object, and produces him as
a ‘work’; for apart from the purpose which is negatively con¬
nected with the Family, the actual deed has only a limited con¬
tent. Finally, just as little should we understand the service as
a help in time of need by which in truth the individual in his
entirety is rescued; for such help is itself a completely contingent
act, the occasion of which is an ordinary reality which can either
be or not be. The deed, then, which embraces the entire exist¬
ence of the blood-relation, does not concern the citizen, for he
does not belong to the Family, nor the individual who is to



270


C. (BB.) SPIRIT

become a citizen and will cease to count as this particular in¬
dividual; it has as its object and content this particular indivi¬
dual who belongs to the Family, but is taken as a universal being
freed from his sensuous, i.e. individual, reality. The deed no
longer concerns the living but the dead, the individual who,
after a longsuccessionofseparate disconnected experiences, con¬
centrates himself into a single completed shape, and has raised
himself out of the unrest of the accidents of life into the calm
of simple universality. But because it is only as a citizen that
he is actual and substantial, the individual, so far as he is not
a citizen but belongs to the Family, is only an unreal impotent
shadow.

452. This universality which the individual as such attains
is pure being, death ; it is a state which has been reached imme¬
diately, in the course of Nature , not the result of an action con¬
sciously done. The duty of the member of a Family is on that
account to add this aspect, in order that the individual’s ulti¬
mate being, too, shall not belong solely to Nature and remain
something irrational, but shall be something done, and the right
of consciousness be asserted in it. Or rather, the meaning of
the action is that because in truth the calm and universality
of a self-conscious being do not belong to Nature, the illusory
appearance that the death of the individual results from a con¬
scious action on the part of Nature may be dispelled, and the
truth established. What Nature did in the individual is that
aspect in which his development into a universal is exhibited
as the movement of an [immediate] existent. This movement
falls, it is true, within the ethical community, and has this for
its End; death is the fulfilment and the supreme ‘work’
which the individual as such undertakes on its behalf. But in
so far as he is essentially a particular individual, it is an accident
that his death was directly connected with his ‘work’ for the
universal and was the result of it; partly because, if his death
was such a result, it is the natural negativity and movement of
the individual as a [mere] existent, in which consciousness does
not return into itself and become self-consciousness; or partly
because, since the movement of what [merely] exists consists
in its being superseded and becoming a being-for-self, death
is the side of diremption in which the attained being-for-self
is something other than the mere existent which began the


THE ETHICAL ORDER


271


movement. Because the ethical order is Spirit in its immediate
truth, the sides into which its consciousness sunders itself also
fall into this form of immediacy, and individuality passes over
into this abstract negativity which, being in its own self without
consolation and reconciliation, must receive them essentially
through a real and external act. Blood-relationship supplements,
then, the abstract natural process by adding to it the movement
of consciousness, interrupting the work of Nature and rescuing
the blood-relation from destruction; or better, because destruc¬
tion is necessary, the passage of the blood-relation into mere
being, it takes on itself the act of destruction. Through this it
comes about that the dead, the universal being, becomes a being
that has returned into itself, a being-for-self, or, the powerless,
simply isolated individual has been raised to universal individu¬
ality. The dead individual, by having liberated his being from
his action or his negative unity, is an empty singular, merely
a passive being-for-another, at the mercy of every lower
irrational individuality and the forces of abstract material ele¬
ments, all of which are now more powerful than himself: the
former on account of the life they possess, the latter on account
of their negative nature. The Family keeps away from the dead
this dishonouring of him by unconscious appetites and abstract
entities, and puts its own action in their place, and weds the
blood-relation to the bosom of the earth, to the elemental
imperishable individuality. The Family thereby makes him a
member of a community which prevails over and holds under
control the forces of particular material elements and the lower
forms of life, which sought to unloose themselves against him
and to destroy him.

453- This last duty thus constitutes the perfect divine law, or
the'positive ethical action towards the individual. Every other
relationship to him which does not remain one simply of love
but is ethical, belongs to human law and has the negative sig¬
nificance of raising the individual above his confinement within
the natural community to which he in his [natural] existence
belongs. Now, although human right has for its content and
power the actual ethical substance that is conscious of itself,
i.e. the entire nation, while the divine right and law has for its
content and power the individual who is beyond the real world,
yet he is not without power. His power is the abstract, pure


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


272

universal, t\\z elemental'indiv'iduaX which equally draws back into
the pure abstraction which is its essence the individuality that
breaks loose from the element, and constitutes the self-conscious
reality of the nation—draws it back into the essence which is
its ground. How this power is manifested in the Notion itself,
we shall see in the ensuing development.

454. Now, in the one law as in the other there are also dif¬
ferences and gradations. For since both laws have within them
the moment of consciousness, difference is developed within the
laws themselves, and this constitutes their movement and their
own peculiar life. Consideration of these differences reveals the
way in which they operate, and the mode of self-consciousness
of the two universal essential natures of the ethical world, and
also their connection and transition into one another.

455. The community , the superior law whose validity is openly
apparent, has its real vitality in the government as that in which
it has an individual form. Government is the reality of Spirit
that is reflected into itself, the simple self of the entire ethical
substance. This simple power does indeed allow the Family to
expand into its constituent members, and to give to each part
an enduring being and a being-for-self of its own. Spirit has
in this its reality or its objective existence, and the Family is
the element of this reality. But Spirit is at the same time the power
of the whole, which brings these parts together again into a
negative unity, giving them the feeling of their lack of indepen¬
dence, and keeping them aware that they have their life only
in the whole. The community may, on the one hand, organize
itself into systems of personal independence and property, of
laws relating to persons and things; and, on the other hand,
the various ways of working for Ends which are in the first in¬
stance particular Ends—those of gain and enjoyment—it may
articulate into their own special and independent associations.
The Spirit of universal assembly and association is the simple
and negative essence of those systems which tend to isolate
themselves. In order not to let them become rooted and set in
this isolation, thereby breaking up the whole and letting the
[communal] spirit evaporate, government has from time to
time to shake them to their core by war. By this means the
government upsets their established order, and violates their
right to independence, while the individuals who, absorbed in


THE ETHICAL ORDER


273


their own way of life, break loose from the whole and strive
after the inviolable independence and security of the person,
are made to feel in the task laid on them their lord and master,
death. Spirit, by thus throwing into the melting-pot the stable
existence of these systems, checks their tendency to fall away
from the ethical order, and to be submerged in a [merely]
natural existence; and it preserves and raises conscious self into
freedom and its own power. The negative essence shows itself
to be the real power of the community and the force of its self-
preservation. The community therefore possesses the truth and
the confirmation of its power in the essence of the Divine Law
and in the realm of the nether world.

456. The Divine Law which governs the family has likewise
on its side differences within itself whose interrelationships con¬
stitute the living process of its actuality. But among the three
relationships, of husband and wife, parents and children,
brothers and sisters, the relationship of husband and wife is in
the first place the one in which one consciousness immediately
recognizes itself in another, and in which there is knowledge
of this mutual recognition. Because this self-recognition is a
natural and not an ethical one, it is only a representation, an
image of Spirit, not actually Spirit itself. A representation or
image, however, has its actual existence in something other
than itself. This relationship therefore has its actual existence
not in itself but in the child—an ‘other’, whose coming into
existence is the relationship, and is also that in which the rela¬
tionship itself gradually passes away; and this alternation of
successive generations has its enduring basis in the nation. The
dutiful reverence of husband and wife towards each other is
thus mixed with a natural relation and with feeling, and the
return-into-self of the relationship does not take place within
the relationship itself; similarly with the second relationship,
the dutiful reverence of parents and children towards one
another. That of parents towards their children is emotionally
affected by the fact that the objective reality of the relationship
does not exist in them, but in the children, and by their witness¬
ing the development in the children of an independent existence
which they are unable to take back again; the independent ex¬
istence of the children remains an alien reality, a reality all its
own. That of children towards parents is emotionally affected,


274 C. (BB.) SPIRIT

conversely, by the fact that they derive their existence from, or
have their essential being in, what is other than themselves, and
passes away, and by their attaining independence and a
self-consciousness of their own only by being separated from
their source—a separation in which the source dries up.

457. Both these relationships are confined within the transi¬
tion and the disparity of the sides which are assigned to them.
The relationship in its unmixed form is found, however, in that
between brother and sister. They are the same blood which has,
however, in them reached a state of rest and equilibrium.
Therefore, they do not desire one another, nor have they given
to, or received from, one another this independent being-for-
self; on the contrary, they are free individualities in regard to
each other. Consequently, the feminine, in the form of the
sister, has the highest intuitive awareness of what is ethical. She
does not attain to consciousness of it, or to the objective existence
of it, because the law of the Family is an implicit, inner essence
which is not exposed to the daylight of consciousness, but
remains an inner feeling and the divine element that is exempt
from an existence in the real world. The woman is associated
with these household gods [Penates] and beholds in them both
her universal substance and her particular individuality, yet
in such a way that this relation of her individuality to them
is at the same time not the natural one of desire. As a daughter,
the woman must now see her parents pass away with a natural
emotion and ethical resignation, for it is only at the cost of this
relationship that she can achieve that existence of her own of
which she is capable. Thus in the parents, she does not behold
her own being-for-self in a positive form. The relationships of
mother and wife, however, are those of particular individuals,
partly in the form of something natural pertaining to desire,
partly in the form of something negative which sees in those
relationships only something evanescent and also, again, the
particular individual is for that very reason a contingent ele¬
ment which can be replaced by another individual. In the ethi¬
cal household, it is not a question of this particular husband,
this particular child, but simply of husband and children gener¬
ally; the relationships of the woman are based, not on feeling,
but on the universal. The difference between the ethical life
of the woman and that of the man consists just in this, that in


THE ETHICAL ORDER


275


her vocation as an individual and in her pleasure, her interest
is centred on the universal and remains alien to the particularity
of desire; whereas in the husband these two sides are separated;
and since he possesses as a citizen the self-conscious power of
universality, he thereby acquires the right of desire and, at the
same time, preserves his freedom in regard to it. Since, then,
in this relationship of the wife there is an admixture of particu¬
larity, her ethical life is not pure; but in so far as it is ethical,
the particularity is a matter of indifference, and the wife is with¬
out the moment of knowing herself as this particular self in the
other partner. The brother, however, is for the sister a passive,
similar being in general; the recognition of herself in him is pure
and unmixed with any natural desire. In this relationship,
therefore, the indifference of the particularity, and the ethical
contingency of the latter, are not present; but the moment of
the individual self, recognizing and being recognized, can here
assert its right, because it is linked to the equilibrium of the
blood and is a relation devoid of desire. The loss of the brother
is therefore irreparable to the sister and her duty towards him
is the highest. 1

458. This relationship is at the same time the limit at which
the self-contained life of the Family breaks up and goes beyond
itself. The brother is the member of the Family in whom its
Spirit becomes an individuality which turns towards another
sphere, and passes over into the consciousness of universality.
The brother leaves this immediate, elemental, and therefore,
strictly speaking, negative ethical life of the Family, in order
to acquire and produce the ethical life that is conscious of itself
and actual.

459. He passes from the divine law, within whose sphere he
lived, over to human law. But the sister becomes, or the wife
remains, the head of the household and the guardian of the
divine law. In this way, the two sexes overcome their [merely]
natural being and appear in their ethical significance, as diverse
beings who share between them the two distinctions belonging
to the ethical substance. These two universal beings of the ethical
world have, therefore, their specific individuality in naturally dis¬
tinct self-consciousnesses, because the ethical Spirit is the imme¬
diate unity of the substance with self-consciousness—an imme-

1 Cf. Antigone, 1 . 910.


276 C. (BB.) SPIRIT

diacy which appears, therefore, both from the side of reality and
of difference, as the existence of a natural difference. It is that
side which, in the shape of individuality that is real to itself,
showed itself in the Notion of spiritual being as an originally
determinate nature . This moment loses the indeterminateness
which it still has there, and the contingent diversity of disposi¬
tions and capacities. It is now the specific antithesis of the two
sexes whose natural existence acquires at the same time the sig¬
nificance of their ethical determination.

460. The difference of the sexes and their ethical content
remains, however, in the unity of the substance, and its move¬
ment is just the constant becoming of that substance. The hus¬
band is sent out by the Spirit of the Family into the community
in which he finds his self-conscious being. Just as the Family
in this way possesses in the community its substance and endur¬
ing being, so, conversely, the community possesses in the Family
the formal element of its actual existence, and in the divine law
its power and authentication. Neither of the two is by itself abso¬
lutely valid; human law proceeds in its living process from the
divine, the law valid on earth from that of the nether world,
the conscious from the unconscious, mediation from imme¬
diacy—and equally returns whence it came. The power of the
nether world, on the other hand, has its actual existence on
earth; through consciousness, it becomes existence and
activity.

461. The universal ethical beings are, then, the substance
qua universal, and the substance qua an individual conscious¬
ness. Their universal actuality is the nation and the Family;
while they have their natural self and operative individuality
in man and woman. In this content of the ethical world we
see achieved those ends which the previous insubstantial forms
of consciousness set themselves; what reason apprehended only
as object has become self-consciousness, and what the latter pos¬
sessed only within itself is now present as a true, objective
reality. What observation knew as a given object in which the
self had no part, is here a given custom, but a reality which
is at the same time the deed and the work of the subject finding
it. The individual who seeks the pleasure of enjoying his individu¬
ality , finds it in the Family, and the necessity in which that
pleasure passes away is his own self-consciousness as a citizen


THE ETHICAL ORDER


277


of his nation. Or, again, it is in knowing that the law of his
own heart is the law of all hearts, in knowing the consciousness
of the self as the acknowledged universal order; it is virtue,
which enjoys the fruits of its sacrifice, which brings about what
it sets out to do, viz. to bring forth the essence into the light
of day, and its enjoyment is this universal life. Finally, con¬
sciousness of the ‘matter in hand’ itself finds satisfaction in the
real substance which contains and preserves in a positive man¬
ner the abstract moments of that empty category. That sub¬
stance has, in the ethical powers, a genuine content that takes
the place of the insubstantial commandments which sound
Reason wanted to give and to know; and thus it gets an in¬
trinsically determinate standard for testing, not the laws, but
what is done.

462. The whole is a stable equilibrium of all the parts, and
each part is a Spirit at home in this whole, a Spirit which does
not seek its satisfaction outside of itself but finds it within itself,
because it is itself in this equilibrium with the whole. This equi¬
librium can, it is true, only be a living one by inequality arising
in it, and being brought back to equilibrium by Justice. Justice,
however, is neither an alien entity remote from this whole, nor
the reality (unworthy of the name of Justice) of mutual malice,
treachery, ingratitude, etc. which would execute judgement in
an unreasoning, arbitrary manner, by misunderstanding the
context of the action, and by unconscious acts of omission and
commission. On the contrary, it is the Justice of human law
which brings back into the universal the element of being-for-
self which has broken away from the balanced whole, viz. the
independent classes and individuals; it is the government of the
nation, which is the self-affirming individuality of the universal
essence and the self-conscious will of all. The Justice, however,
which brings back to equilibrium the universal in its ascen¬
dancy over the individual is equally the simple Spirit of the
individual who has suffered wrong; it is not split up into two,
the one who has suffered the wrong and an entity in a remote
beyond. The individual himself is the power of the nether
world, and it is his Erinys, his ‘fury’, which wreaks vengeance.
For his individuality, his blood, still lives on in the household,
his substance has an enduring reality. The wrong which can
be inflicted on the individual in the ethical realm is simply this,


278 c. (BB.) SPIRIT

that something merely happens to him. The power which inflicts
this wrong on the conscious individual of making him into a
mere Thing, is Nature; it is the universality not of the community ,
but the abstract universality of mere being ; and the individual,
in avenging the wrong he has suffered, does not turn against
the former, for it is not at its hands that he has suffered, but
against the latter. As we saw, the consciousness of [those who
share] the blood of the individual repair this wrong in such a
way that what has simply happened becomes rather a work deliber¬
ately done , in order that the mere being of the wrong, its ultimate
form, may also be something willed and thus something agreeable.

463. The ethical realm is in this way in its enduring existence
an immaculate world, a world unsullied by any internal dis¬
sension. Similarly, its process is a tranquil transition of one of
its powers into the other, in such a way that each preserves and
rings forth the other. We do indeed see it divide itself into two

essences and their reality; but their antithesis is rather the auth-

en ication o one through the other, and where they come into
term anH ntaCt eac h other as real opposites, their middle
The nnp ^ ommon e emerU is their immediate interpenetration,
through the^H^r’ \j C ^ n ^ versa ^ self-conscious Spirit, becomes,
extreme *united with its other
other hand the r” ' ement, with unconscious Spirit. On the
I'd, orT li " h “ ™ individualization or the
woman, through whom”^'^ Ual ltS real existence — in the

Spirit rises outfits unrealit^ ^ the unconsC1 °, US

state in which it is .ml- • Uy mt ° actua * existence, out of a
of conscious Spirit rp nowm § and un conscious into the realm

the active middle term man an d woman constitutes

sunders itself into the? ° * C w ^°^ e an d the element which
is equally their immedi e a^ tremeS ofdivine and human law. It

syllogisms into one and th Uni ° n w ^i c h converts those first two
process the opposite Same Syllogism > and unites into one
unreality, the downward : one from actuality down to
into independent membp m ° Vement human law, organized
and the other, the unwarr] S5 t0 ^ dan S er and trial of death;
world to the actuality of th 7-°u ement of the law of the nether
ence. Of these movements 6 * °^ da V an d to conscious exist-
to woman. 5 the former falls to man, the latter



the ethical order


279


b. Ethical action. Human and Divine knowledge. Guilt and Destiny

, fi . The way in which the antithesis is constituted in this
ethical realm is such that self-consciousness has not yet received
its due as a particular individuality. There it has the value, on
, hand merely of the universal will, and on the other,

t e one > part i C ular individual counts only as a

Tlv unreality. As yet, no deed has been committed; but
^ H H is the artual self. It disturbs the peaceful organization
d ^of theEthical world. What there appears as

an d movement ol ^ essences> each of which authenti-

° nH completes the other, becomes through the deed a
cates an P Jn which each proves itse lf t0 be the non-

transition f PP^an ^ authentication , 0 f itse lf and the othen

reality, r ; movement, or the eternal necessity, of

‘^eadTuTfete wE engulfs in the abyss of its single nature
a ^ r , , man law alike, as well as the two self-con-

chvine an u these 0W ers have the i r existence—and

into the being-for-self of .he purely

individual self-consaousne^ich ^ movement starts and on

t5 6 u • d nlace is the ethical realm; what is active in this
which it P ’ is S elf.consciousness. Qua ethical con-
movement how , direction of activity towards

sciousness, t is th P H In it there is no caprice

the essentiality of ethical j ndec i s ion , since the making and

and equally n ° * tr Jj ven u p; on the contrary, the essence
testing °[ aw .f, this consciousness immediate, unwavering,
of ethical life is f h cnt , we are not faced with the

without cont ad ctio s _ on passion and duty , nor with

sorry spectacle of a ^ col)ision bet ween duty and duty-a

the comic specta ^ content; is the same as that

collision which, ° for pass i 0 n is equally capable of

between P asslon because when consciousness separates itself
beingseenasaduty, ntia] essence and withdraws into

from its immedi > , forma j un i ve rsal into which one

itself, it becomes f fits equa n y well as we found before,

content as well a is com i c because it expresses a con-

But the collision, ° contra diction of an Absolute that is opposed
tradiction, viz. t t h e n thg not hingness of this so-called

to itself: an Absolute,





28o


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


Absolute or duty. The ethical consciousness, however, knows
what it has to do, and has already decided whether to belong
to the divine or the human law. This immediate firmness of
decision is something implicit, and therefore has at the same
time the significance ofa natural being as we have seen. Nature,
not the accident of circumstances or choice, assigns one sex to
one law, the other to the other law; or conversely, the two
ethical powers themselves give themselves an individual exist¬
ence and actualize themselves in the two sexes.

466. Now, because, on the one hand, the ethical order essen¬
tially consists in this immediate firmness of decision, and for
that reason there is for consciousness essentially only one law,
while, on the other hand, the ethical powers are real and effec¬
tive in the self of consciousness, these powers acquire the signifi¬
cance of excluding and opposing one another: in self-conscious¬
ness they exist explicitly, whereas in the ethical order they are
only implicit. The ethical consciousness, because it is decisively
for one of the two powers, is essentially character; it does not
accept that both have the same essential nature. For this reason,
the opposition between them appears as an unfortunate collision
of duty merely with a reality which possesses no rights of its
own. The ethical consciousness is, qua self-consciousness, in this
opposition and as such it at once proceeds to force into subjec¬
tion to the law which it accepts, the reality which is opposed
to it, or else to outwit it. Since it sees right only on one side
and wrong on the other, that consciousness which belongs to
the divine law sees in the other side only the violence of human
caprice, while that which holds to human law sees in the other
only the self-will and disobedience of the individual who insists
on being his own authority. For the commands of government
have a universal, public meaning open to the light of day; the
will of the other law, however, is locked up in the darkness of
the nether regions, and in its outer existence manifests as the
will of an isolated individual which, as contradicting the first,
is a wanton outrage.

467. In this way there arises in consciousness the antithesis
of the known and the unknown, just as in substance there was
an antithesis of the conscious and the unconscious; and the abso¬
lute right of ethical self-consciousness comes into conflict with
the divine right of essential being. For self-consciousness, qua


THE ETHICAL ORDER


28


consciousness, the world of objective reality as such has an
essential being; but according to its substance it is the unity
of itself and this opposite; and ethical self-consciousness is the
consciousness of that substance; therefore the --object, in its
opposition to the subject, has lost entirely die significance of
having an essential being of its own. Just as those spheres in
which it is only a Thing have long since vanished, so too have
these spheres in which consciousness gives a fixed existence to
something from out of itself and converts an isolated moment
into essence. Against such one-sidedness, the actual world has
a power of its own; it stands leagued with truth against con¬
sciousness, and itself shows the latter what truth is. The ethical
consciousness, however, has drunk from the cup of substance
and has forgotten all the one-sidedness of being-for-self, of its
ends and peculiar notions, and has, therefore, at the same time
drowned in this Stygian water all essentiality of its own, and
all independence of the objective, actual world. Its absolute
right is, therefore, that when it acts in accordance with ethical
law, it shall find in this actualization nothing else but the fulfil¬
ment of this law itself, and the deed shall manifest only ethical
action. ^Vhat is ethical, being at once absolute essence and abso¬
lute power, cannot suffer any perversion of its content. If it were
only absolute essence without power, it could suffer perversion
by the individuality; but this, as an ethical consciousness, when
it gave up its one-sided being-for-self, renounced its right to per¬
vert the content; just as, conversely, mere power would be per¬
verted by essence if it were a one-sided being-for-self. On
account of this unity, the individuality is the pure form of sub¬
stance which is the content, and the action is the transition from
thought to actuality merely as the movement of an insubstantial
antithesis whose moments have no particular, distinctive con¬
tent and no essentiality of their own. Consequently, the absolute
right of the ethical consciousness is that the deed, the shape in
which it actualizes itself, shall be nothing else but what it knows.

468. But the ethical essence has split itself into two laws, and
consciousness, as an undivided attitude towards law, is assigned
only to one. Just as this simple, upitary consciousness insists,
as its absolute right, that the essence has appeared to it, qua ethi¬
cal, as the essence is in itself , so too this essence insists on the
right belonging to its reality , or on its own right to be a twofold


282


C. (BB.) SPIRIT

essence. But at the same time this right of the essence does not
stand over against self-consciousness, as if the essence existed
somewhere else; on the contrary, it is self-consciousness’s own
essence; it has its existence and its power in self-consciousness
alone, and its antithesis is the act of self-consciousness itself. For
this latter, just because it is a self to itself and advances to action,
raises itself out of simple immediacy, and spontaneously splits
itself into two. By this act it gives up the specific quality of the
ethical life, of being the simple certainty of immediate truth,
and initiates the division of itself into itself as the active prin¬
ciple, and into the reality over against it, a reality which, for
it, is negative. By the deed, therefore, it becomes guilt. For the
deed is its own doing, and ‘doing’ is its inmost nature. And the
guilt also acquires the meaning of crime ; for as simple, ethical
consciousness, it has turned towards one law, but turned its
back on the other and violates the latter by its deed. Guilt is
not an indifferent, ambiguous affair, as if the deed as actually
seen in the light of day could, or perhaps could not, be the action
of the self, as if with the doing of it there could be linked some¬
thing external and accidental that did not belong to it, from
which aspect, therefore, the action would be innocent. On the
contrary, the action is itself this splitting into two, this explicit
self-affirmation and the establishing over against itself of an
alien external reality; that there is such a reality, this stems from
the action itself and results from it. Innocence, therefore, is
merely non-action, like the mere being of a stone, not even that
of a child. As regards content, however, the ethical action con¬
tains the moment of crime, because it does not do away with
the natural allocation of the two laws to tjie two sexes, but rather,
being an undivided attitude towards the law, remains within
the sphere of natural immediacy, and, qua action, turns this one¬
sidedness into guilt by seizing on only one side of the essence,
and adopting a negative attitude towards the other, i.e. violat¬
ing it. The place in the universal ethical life of guilt and crime,
of deeds and actions, will find more definite expression later;
but this much is immediately evident, that it is not this particu¬
lar individual who acts and is guilty; for as this self he is only
the unreal shadow, or he exists merely as a universal self, and
individuality is purely the formal moment of the action as such,
the content being the laws and customs which, for the indivi-


THE ETHICAL ORDER


283


dual, are those of his class and station. He is the Substance qua
genus, which by its determinateness, becomes indeed a species,
though the species remains at the same time the universal of
the genus. Self-consciousness within the nation descends from
the universal only as far down as mere particularity, and not
down to the single individuality which posits an exclusive self,
an actual existence which in its action is negative towards itself.
On the contrary, its action rests on secure confidence in the
whole, unmixed with any alien element, neither with fear nor
hostility.

469. Ethical self-consciousness now learns from its deed the
developed nature of what it actually did, as much when it
obeyed divine law as when it followed human law. The law
that is manifest to it is linked in the essence with its opposite;
the essence is the unity of both; but the deed has only carried
out one law in contrast to the other. But the two laws being
linked in the essence, the fulfilment of the one evokes the other
and—the deed having made it so—calls it forth as a violated
and now hostile entity demanding revenge. In the action, only
one aspect of the resolve as such is clearly manifest. The resolve,
however, is in itself the negative aspect which confronts the
resolve with an ‘other’, with something alien to the resolve
which knows what it does. Actuality therefore holds concealed
within it the other aspect which is alien to this knowledge, and
does not reveal the whole truth about itself to consciousness:
the son does not recognize his father in the man who has
wronged him and whom he slays, nor his mother in the queen
whom he makes his wife. In this way, a power which shuns the
light of day ensnares the ethical self-consciousness, a power
which breaks forth only after the deed is done, and seizes the
doer in the act. For the accomplished deed is the removal of
the antithesis between the knowing self and the actuality con¬
fronting it. The doer cannot deny the crime or his guilt: the
significance of the deed is that what was unmoved has been
set in motion, and that what was locked up in mere possibility
has been brought out into the open, hence to link together the
unconscious and the conscious, non-being with being. In this
truth, therefore, the deed is brought out into the light of day,
as something in which the conscious is bound up with the un¬
conscious, what is one’s own with what is alien to it, as an entity


2 g 4 C. (BB.) spirit

divided within itself, whose other aspect consciousness experi¬
ences and also finds to be its own, but as the power it has vio¬
lated and roused to hostility.

470. It can be that the right which lay in wait is not present
in its own proper shape to the consciousness of the doer, but is
present only implicitly in the inner guilt of the resolve and the
action. But the ethical consciousness is more complete, its guilt
more inexcusable, if it knows beforehand the law and the power
which it opposes, if it takes them to be violence and wrong,
to be ethical merely by accident, and, like Antigone, knowingly
commits the crime. The accomplished deed completely alters
its point of view; the very performance of it declares that what
is ethical must be actual ; for the realization of the purpose is the
purpose of the action. Doing directly expresses the unity of actu¬
ality and substance; it declares that actuality is not an accident
of essence, but that, in union with essence, it is not granted to
any right that is not a true right. The ethical consciousness
must, on account of this actuality and on account of its deed,
acknowledge its opposite as its own actuality, must acknow-
ledge its guilt.

Because we suffer we acknowledge we have erred. 1

471. With this acknowledgement there is no longer any con¬
flict between ethical purpose and actuality; it signifies the
return to an ethical frame of mind, which knows that nothing
counts but right. But the doer thereby surrenders his own
character and the reality of his self, and has been ruined. His being
consists in his belonging to his ethical law, as his substance;
in acknowledging the opposite law, the other ceases to be for
him his substance, and instead of attaining actuality it has
become an unreality, a sentiment or disposition. The substance
does appear, it is true, in the individuality as his ‘pathos’, and
the individuality appears as that which animates the substance
and hence stands above it; but the substance is a ‘pathos’ that
is at the same time his character. The ethical individuality is
directly and intrinsically one with this his universal aspect,
exists in it alone, and is incapable of surviving the destruction
of this ethical power by its opposite.

472. But at the same time, this individuality has the certainty
that that individuality whose ‘pathos’ is this opposing power

1 Antigone , 1 . 926.


THE ETHICAL ORDER


285

suffers no more injury than it has inflicted. The movement of
the ethical powers against each other and of the individualities
calling them into life and action have attained their true end
only in so far as both sides suffer the same destruction. For
neither power has any advantage over the other that would
make it a more essential moment of the substance. The equal
essentiality of both and their indifferent existence alongside
each other means that they are without a self. In the deed they
exist as beings with a self, but with a diverse self; and this con¬
tradicts the unity of the self, and constitutes their unrighteous¬
ness and necessary destruction. Character likewise, in respect
of its ‘pathos’ or substance, in part belongs to one only; in part,
from the aspect of knowing, the one character like the other
is split up into a conscious and an unconscious part; and since
each itself calls forth this opposition and its not-knowing is,
through the deed, its own affair, each is responsible for the guilt
which destroys it. The victory of one power and its character,
and the defeat of the other, would thus be only the part and
the incomplete work which irresistibly advances to the equilib¬
rium of the two. Only in the downfall of both sides alike is abso¬
lute right accomplished, and the ethical substance as the nega¬
tive power which engulfs both sides, that is, omnipotent and
righteous Destiny, steps on the scene.

473. If both powers are taken according to their specific con¬
tent and its individualization, we are presented with the picture
of the conflict between them in their individual forms. On its
formal side, it is the conflict of the ethical order and self-con¬
sciousness with unconscious Nature and the contingency stem¬
ming from Nature. The latter has a right against the former,
because this is only true Spirit, is only in an immediate unity with
its substance. On the side of content, it is the clash between
divine and human law. The youth comes away from the uncon¬
scious Spirit of the Family, and becomes the individuality of
the community. But that he still belongs to the Nature from
which he wrenched himself free is evidenced by the fact that
he emerges in the contingent form of two brothers, each of
whom with equal right takes possession of the community; the
inequality of the earlier and later birth, an inequality which
is a natural difference, has no importance for them when they
enter the ethical life of the community. But the government,


286


C. (BB.) SPIRIT

as the unitary soul or the self of the national Spirit, does not
tolerate a duality of individuality; and the ethical necessity of
this unity is confronted by the natural accident of there being
more than one. These two brothers therefore fall into dispute
and their equal right to the power of the state destroys them
both, for they were equally wrong. Looked at from the human
point of view, the one who has committed the crime is the one
who, not being in actual possession, attacks the community at
the head of which the other stood, while, on the other hand,
he has right on his side who knew how to apprehend the other
merely as an isolated individual, detached from the com¬
munity, and, taking advantage of his powerlessness, banished
him; he has struck only at the individual as such, not the com¬
munity, not at the essence of human right. The community,
attacked and defended by what is merely particular, and so
without a substantial content, preserves itself, and the brothers
bring about their own destruction through their reciprocal
action. For individuality, which for the sake of its being-for-
self, puts the whole in peril, has expelled itself from the com¬
munity, and is the source of its own destruction. The com¬
munity, however, will honour the one who was found on its
side; but the government, the restored unitary self of the
community, will punish him who already proclaimed its
devastation on the walls of the city, by depriving him of the
last honour. He who wantonly attacked the Spirit’s highest
form of consciousness, the Spirit of the community, must be
stripped of the honour of his entire and finished being, the
honour due to the Spirit of the departed.

474. But if the universal thus easily knocks off the very tip
of the pyramid and, indeed, carries off the victory over the
rebellious principle of pure individuality, viz. the Family, it has
thereby merely entered on a conflict with the divine law, a con¬
flict of self-conscious Spirit with what is unconscious. For the
latter is the other essential power, and is therefore not de¬
stroyed, but merely wronged, by the conscious Spirit. But it
has only the bloodless shade to help it in actually carrying out
its law in face of the power and authority of that other, publicly
manifest law. Being the law of weakness and darkness it there¬
fore at first succumbs to the powerful law of the upper world,
for the power of the former is effective in the underworld, not


THE ETHICAL ORDER


287

on earth. But the outwardly actual which has taken away from
the inner world its honour and power has in so doing consumed
its own essence. The publicly manifest Spirit has the root of
its power in the nether world. The self-certainty and self-
assurance of a nation possesses the truth of its oath, which binds
all into one, solely in the mute unconscious substance of all,
in the waters of forgetfulness. Thus it is that the fulfilment of
the Spirit of the upper world is transformed into its opposite,
and it learns that its supreme right is a supreme wrong, that
its victory is rather its own downfall. The dead, whose right
is denied, knows therefore how to find instruments of ven¬
geance, which are equally effective and powerful as the power
which has injured it. These powers are other communities
whose altars the dogs or birds defiled with the corpse, which
is not raised into unconscious universality by being given back,
as is its due, to the elemental individuality [the earth], but
remains above ground in the realm of outer reality, and has
now acquired as a force of divine law a self-conscious, real
universality. They rise up in hostility and destroy the com¬
munity which has dishonoured and shattered its own power,
the sacred claims of the Family.

475. In this representation, the movement of human and
divine law finds its necessity expressed in individuals in whom
the universal appears as a ‘pathos’, and the activity of the move¬
ment appears as the action of individuals, which gives the
appearance, of contingency to the necessity of the activity. But
individuality and action constitute the principle of individu¬
ality as such, a principle which in its pure universality was called
inner divine law. As a moment of the visible community its
activity is not confined merely to the underworld, or to its outer
existence, but it has an equally visible existence and movement
in the actual nation. Taken in this form, what was represented
as a simple movement of the individualized ‘pathos’ acquires
a different look, and the crime and consequent destruction of
the community acquire the proper and characteristic form of
their existence. Human law in its universal existence is the com¬
munity, in its activity in general is the manhood of the com¬
munity, in its real and effective activity is the government. It
is , moves , and maintains itself by consuming and absorbing into
itself the separatism of the Penates, or the separation into


288


C. (BB.) SPIRIT

independent families presided over by womankind, and by keep¬
ing them dissolved in the fluid continuity of its own nature. But
the Family is, at the same time, in general its element, the in¬
dividual consciousness the basis of its general activity. Since the
community only gets an existence through its interference with
the happiness of the Family, and by dissolving [individual] self-
consciousness into the universal, it creates for itself in what it
suppresses and what is at the same time essential to it an internal
enemy—womankind in general. Womankind—the everlasting
irony [in the life] of the community—changes by intrigue the
universal end of the government into a private end, transforms
its universal activity into a work of some particular individual,
and perverts the universal property of the state into a possession
and ornament for the Family. Woman in this way turns to ridi¬
cule the earnest wisdom of mature age which, indifferent to
purely private pleasures and enjoyments, as well as to playing
an active part, only thinks of and cares for the universal. She
makes this wisdom an object of derision for raw and irrespon¬
sible youth and unworthy of their enthusiasm. In general, she
maintains that it is the power of youth that really counts: the
worth of the son lies in his being the lord and master of the
mother who bore him, that of the brother as being one in whom
the sister finds man on a level of equality, that of the youth
as being one through whom the daughter, freed from her depen¬
dence [on the family] obtains the enjoyment and dignity of
wifehood. The community, however, can only maintain itself
by suppressing this spirit of individualism, and, because it is
an essential moment, all the same creates it and, moreover, cre¬
ates it by its repressive attitude towards it as a hostile principle.
However, this principle, being merely evil and futile in its
separation from the universal end, would be quite ineffectual
if the community itself did not recognize the power of youth
(the manhood which, while immature, still stands within the
sphere of individuality), as the power of the whole. For the com¬
munity is a nation, is itself an individuality, and essentially is
only such for itself by other individualities being for it , by
excluding them from itselfand knowing itself to be independent
of them. The negative side of the community, suppressing the
isolation of individuals within it , but spontaneously active in an
outward direction , finds its weapons in individuality. War is the


THE ETHICAL ORDER


289


Spirit and the form in which the essential moment of the ethical
substance, the absolute freedom of the ethical self from every
existential form, is present in its actual and authentic existence.
While, on the one hand, war makes the individual systems of
property and personal independence, as well as the personality
of the individual himself, feel the power of the negative, on the
other hand, this negativity is prominent in war as that which
preserves the whole. The brave youth in whom woman finds
her pleasure, the suppressed principle of corruption, now has
his day and his worth is openly acknowledged. Now, it is phvsi-
cal strength and what appears as a matter of luck, that decides
on the existence of ethical life and spiritual necessity. Because
the existence ofethical life rests on strength and luck, the decision
is already made that its downfall has come. Just as previously only
the Penates succumbed to the national Spirit, so now the living
Spirits of the nation succumb through their own individuality
and perish in a universal community, whose simple universality
is soulless and dead, and is alive only in the single individual,
qua single. The ethical shape of Spirit has vanished and another
takes its place.

476. This ruin of the ethical Substance and its passage into
another form is thus determined by the fact that the ethical
consciousness is directed on to the law in a way that is essentially
immediate. This determination of immediacy means that Nature
as such enters into the ethical act, the reality of which simply
reveals the contradiction and the germ of destruction inherent
in the beautiful harmony and tranquil equilibrium of the ethi¬
cal Spirit itself. For this immediacy has the contradictory mean¬
ing of being the unconscious tranquillity of Nature, and also the
self-conscious restless tranquillity of Spirit. On account of this
natural aspect, this ethical nation is, in general, an individuality
determined by Nature and therefore limited, and thus meets
its downfall at the hands of another. But with the vanishing
of this determinateness—which in the form of a real existence is
a limitation, but equally the negative element in general and the
self of the individuality—the life of Spirit and this Substance,
which is self-conscious in everyone, is lost. The substance emerges
as a formal universality in them, no longer dwelling in them as a
living Spirit; on the contrary, the simple compactness of their in-
dividualityhas been shattered into a multitude ofseparate atoms.


29 °


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


c. Legal status

477. The universal unity into which the living immediate
unity of individuality and substance withdraws is the soulless
community which has ceased to be the substance—itself uncon¬
scious—of individuals, and in which they now have the value
of selves and substances, possessing a separate being-for-self.
The universal being thus split up into a mere multiplicity of
individuals, this lifeless Spirit is an equality, in which all count
the same, i.e. as persons. What in the world of the ethical order
was called the hidden divine law, has in fact emerged from
its inward state into actuality; in the former state the individual
was actual, and counted as such, merely as a blood-relation of
the family. As this particular individual, he was the departed
spirit devoid of a self; now, however, he has emerged from his
unreal existence. Because the ethical substance is only the true
Spirit, the individual therefore withdraws into the certainty of
his own self; he is that substance as the positive universal, but
his actuality consists in his being a negative universal self. We
saw the powers and shapes of the ethical world swallowed up
in the simple necessity of a blank Destiny. This power of the
ethical world is the substance reflected into its simple unitary
nature; but that being which is reflected back into itself, that
very necessity of blank Destiny, is nothing else but the ‘T of
self-consciousness.


478. This, therefore, counts henceforth as a being that is
in and for itself. To be so acknowledged is its substantiality.
But it is an abstract universality because its content is this
rigid unyielding self, not the self that is dissolved in the
substance.


479. Personality, then, has stepped out of the life of the ethi¬
cal substance. It is the independence of consciousness, an inde¬
pendence which has actual validity. The non-actual thought of
it which came from renouncing the actual world appeared
earlier as the Stoical self-consciousness. Just as this proceeded
from lordship and bondage, as the immediate existence of self-
consciousness, so personality has proceeded from the immediate
life of Spirit, which is the universal dominating will of all, and
equally their service of obedience. What was for Stoicism only
the abstraction of an intrinsic reality is now an actual world. Stoi-


THE ETHICAL ORDER


291


cism is nothing else but the consciousness which reduces to its
abstract form the principle of legal status, an independence that
lacks the life of Spirit. By its flight from the actual world it
attained only to the thought of independence; it is absolutely
for itself , in that it does not attach its being to anything that
exists, but claims to give up everything that exists and places
its essence solely in the unity of pure thought. In the same
way, the right of a person is not tied to a richer or more
powerful existence of the individual as such, nor again to a
universal living Spirit, but rather to the pure One of its
abstract actuality, or to that One qua self-consciousness in
general.

480. Now, just as the abstract independence of Stoicism exhib¬
ited [the process of] its actualization, so too will this last form
of independence [ = personality] recapitulate the process of the
first form. The former passes over into the sceptical confusion
of consciousness, into a negative rambling which, lacking any
stable form, strays fortuitously from one form of being and
thought to another, dissolving them, it is true, in [its] absolute
independence but no less recreating them; it is, in fact, merely
the contradiction of a consciousness which is at once indepen¬
dent and dependent. Personal independence in the sphere of
legal right is really a similar general confusion and reciprocal
dissolution of this kind. For what counts as absolute, essential
being is self-consciousness as the sheer empty unit of the person.
In contrast to this empty universality, substance has the form
of fulness and content , and this content is now set free and is un¬
organized; for the Spirit that subdued it and held it together
in its unity is no longer present. This empty unit of the person
is, therefore, in its reality a contingent existence, and essentially
a process and an action that comes to no lasting result. Like
Scepticism, the formalism of legal right is thus by its very nature
without a peculiar content of its own ; it finds before it a mani¬
fold existence in the form of‘possession’ and, as Scepticism did,
stamps it with the same abstract universality, whereby it is
called ‘property’. But whereas in Scepticism the reality so deter¬
mined is called an illusory appearance and has only a negative
value, in legal right it has a positive value. That negative value
consists in the actual having the significance of the self qua
thought, qua the implicit universal; the positive value in the case


292


C. (BB.) SPIRIT

of legal right, however, consists in its being mine in the sense
of the category, as something whose validity is recognized and
actual. Both are the same abstract universal. The actual content
or the specific character of what is mine—whether it be an
external possession, or also the inner riches or poverty of spirit
and character—is not contained in this empty form, and does
not concern it. The content belongs, therefore, to an autono¬
mous power, which is something different from the formal uni¬
versal, to a power which is arbitrary and capricious. Conscious¬
ness of right, therefore, in the very fact of being recognized as
having validity, experiences rather the loss of its reality and its
complete inessentiality; and to describe an individual as a ‘per¬
son’ is an expression of contempt.

481. The free power of the content determines itself in such
a way that the dispersion of the content into a sheer multiplicity
of personal atoms is, by the nature of this determinateness, at
the same time gathered into a single point, alien to them and
soulless as well. This single point is, on the one hand, like the
unyielding rigidity of their personality, a merely single per¬
sonality; but in contrast to their empty singleness, it has at the
same time the significance for them of the whole content, hence
of real essence, and as against their presumedly absolute, but
intrinsically essenceless, reality it is absolute power and absolute
actuality. This lord and master of the world holds himself in
this way to be the absolute person, at the same time embracing
within himself the whole of existence, the person for whom there
exists no superior Spirit. He is a person, but the solitary person
who stands over against all the rest. These constitute the real
authoritative universality of that person; for the single indivi¬
dual as such is true only as a universal multiplicity of single
individuals. Cut off from this multiplicity, the solitary self is,
in fact, an unreal, impotent self. At the same time it is the con¬
sciousness ot the content which has placed itself in antithesis
to that universal personality. But this content, liberated from
the negative power controlling it, is the chaos ofspiritual powers
which, in their unfettered freedom, become elemental beings
raging madly against one another in a frenzy of destructive
activity. Their impotent self-consciousness is the defenceless
enclosed arena of their tumult. In this knowledge of himself as
the sum and substance of all actual powers, this lord and master


THE ETHICAL ORDER


293


of the world is the titanic self-consciousness that thinks of itself
as being an actual living god. But since he is only the formal
self which is unable to tame those powers, his activities and self¬
enjoyment are equally monstrous excesses.

482. The lord of the world becomes really conscious of what
he is, viz. the universal power of the actual world, in the destruc¬
tive power he exercises against the self of his subjects, the self
which stands over against him. For his power is not the union
and harmony of Spirit in which persons would recognize their
own self-consciousness. Rather they exist, as persons, on their
own account, and exclude any continuity with others from the
rigid unyieldingness of their atomicity. They exist, therefore,
in a merely negative relationship, both to one another and to
him who is their bond of connection or continuity. As this conti¬
nuity, he is the essence and the content of their merely formal
self, but a content alien to them, and a hostile being which in
reality deprives them of that very thing which they regard as
their essential nature, viz. the completely empty form of being-
for-self; and, again, as the continuity of their personality, he
destroys this very personality itself. Legal personality thus
learns rather that it is without any substance, since the alien
content makes itself authoritative in it, and does so because that
content is the reality of such personality. On the other hand,
by indulging in this destructive activity in this insubstantial
arena, the lord of the world obtains for himself the consciousness
of his complete supremacy. However, this self is a mere laying-
waste of everything and therefore merely beside itself, and is
really the abandonment of its own self-consciousness.

483. Such, then, is the constitution of that aspect in which
self-consciousness, qua absolute Being, is actual. But the con¬
sciousness that is driven back into itself from this actuality ponders
this its inessential nature. Earlier we saw the Stoical indepen¬
dence of pure thought pass through Scepticism and find its truth
in the Unhappy Consciousness—the truth about what con¬
stitutes its own true being. If this knowledge appeared then
merely as the one-sided view of consciousness as consciousness,
here the actual truth of that view has become apparent. This
truth consists in the fact that this universally acknowledged authority
of self-consciousness is the reality from which it is alienated.
This acknowledgement of its authority is the universal actuality


294


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


of the self; but this actuality is directly the perversion of the
self as well; it is the loss of its essence. The actuality of the self
that did not exist in the ethical world has been won by its return
into the ‘person’; what in the former was harmoniously one now
emerges in a developed form, but as alienated from itself.
