B. SELF-ALIENATED SPIRIT. CULTURE

484. The ethical Substance kept the antithesis confined
within its simply unitary consciousness, and preserved this con¬
sciousness in an immediate unity with its essence. Essence has,
therefore, the simple determinateness of mere being for con¬
sciousness, which is directed immediately upon it, and is the
essence in the form of custom. Consciousness neither thinks of
itself as this particular exclusive self\ nor has substance the
significance of an existence excluded from it, with which
it would have to become united only by alienating itself from
itself and at the same time producing the substance itself. But
the Spirit whose self is an absolutely discrete unit has its content
confronting it as an equally hard unyielding reality, and here
the world has the character of being something external, the
negative of self-consciousness. This world is, however, a spiri¬
tual entity, it is in itself the interfusion of being and individu¬
ality; this its existence is the work of self-consciousness, but it
is also an alien reality already present and given, a reality which
has a being of its own and in which it does not recognize itself.
This real world is the external essence and the free content of
legal right. But this external world, which the lord of the world
oflegal right takes to himself, is not merely this elemental being
confronting the self as something contingently given; on the
contrary, it is his work, but not in a positive, rather in a nega¬
tive, sense. It obtains its existence through self-consciousness’s
own externalization and separation of itself from its essence
which, in the ruin and devastation which prevail in the world
oflegal right, seems to inflict on self-consciousness from without,
the violence of the liberated elements. These by themselves are
sheer ruin and devastation and the dissolution of themselves.
This dissolution, however, this negative nature of theirs, is just
the self; it is their subject, their activity, and their process. But
this activity and process whereby the substance becomes actual


CULTURE


295


is the alienation of the personality, for the self that has an abso¬
lute significance in its immediate existence, i.e. without having
alienated itself from itself, is without substance, and is the
plaything of those raging elements. Its substance, therefore, is
its externalization, and the externalization is the substance, i.e.
the spiritual powers ordering themselves into a world and
thereby preserving themselves.

485. Substance is in this way Spirit , the self-conscious unity
of the self and essence; each has for the other the significance
of alienation. Spirit is the consciousness of an objective real world
freely existing on its own account; but this consciousness is con¬
fronted by the unity of the self and essence, actual consciousness
by pure consciousness. On the one side, actual self-consciousness,
through its externalization, passes over into the actual world,
and the latter back into actual self-consciousness. On the other
side, this same actuality—both person and objectivity—is
superseded; they are purely universal. This their alienation is
pure consciousness or essence. The present actual world has its anti¬
thesis directly in its beyond , which is both the thinking of it and
its thought-form, just as the beyond has in the present world
its actuality, but an actuality alienated from it.

486. Consequently, this Spirit constructs for itself not merely
a world, but a world that is double, divided and self-opposed.
The world of the ethical Spirit is its own present world; and
therefore each of its powers exists in this unity, and in so far
as they are distinct from one another they are in equilibrium
with the whole. Nothing has the significance of being the nega¬
tive of self-consciousness; even the departed spirit is present in
his b W-relationship, in the self of the family, and the universal
power of the government is the will, the self of the nation. Here,
however, what is present has the significance only of an objective
reality, the consciousness of which exists in a beyond; each
single moment qua essence receives this, and with it actuality,
from an ‘other’, and so far as it is actual, its essence is something
other than its own actuality. Nothing has a Spirit that is
grounded within itself and indwells it, but each has its being
in something outside of and alien to it. The equilibrium of the
whole is not the unity which remains with itself, nor the con¬
tentment that comes from having returned into itself, but rests
on the alienation of opposites. The whole, therefore, like each


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


296

single moment, is a self-alienated actuality; it falls apart into
a realm in which self-consciousness as well as its object is actual ,
and into another, the realm of pure consciousness which, lying
beyond the first, is not a present actuality but exists only for
Faith. Now, just as the ethical world which is separated into
divine and human law in their various forms, and its conscious¬
ness which is separated into knowing and not-knowing, returns
from that dividedness into its destiny, into the self as the negative
power of this antithesis, so these two realms of the self-alienated
Spirit will also return into the self ; but if the former was the
first, merely immediately valid self, the single person , this second
realm, which returns out of its externalization into itself, will
be the universal self the consciousness which has grasped its
Notion , and these spiritual worlds, all of whose moments insist
on a fixed actuality and non-spiritual existence of their own,
will dissolve in pure intellectual insight. This insight, as the self
that apprehends itself, completes [the stage of] culture; it appre¬
hends nothing but self and everything as self, i.e. it comprehends
everything, wipes out the objectivity of things and converts all
intrinsic being into a being for itself In its hostility to Faith as
the alien realm of essence lying in the beyond, it is the Enlighten¬
ment. This Enlightenment completes the alienation of Spirit
in this realm, too, in which that Spirit takes refuge and where
it is conscious of an unruffled peace. It upsets the housekeeping
of Spirit in the household of Faith by bringing into that house¬
hold the tools and utensils of this world, a world which that
Spirit cannot deny is its own, because its consciousness likewise
belongs to it. In this negative activity pure insight at the same
time realizes itself, and produces its own object, the unknowable
absolute Being and the principle of utility. Since in this way actu¬
ality has lost all substantiality and nothing in it has intrinsic
being, not only the realm of Faith, but also the realm of the
actual world, is overthrown. This revolution gives birth to abso¬
lute freedom , and with this freedom the previously alienated
Spirit has completely returned into itself, has abandoned this
region of culture and passes on to another region, the region
of the moral consciousness.
