I. THE WORLD OF S E L F - A L I E N A TE D SPIRIT

487. The world of this Spirit breaks up into two. The first


CULTURE


297


is the world of reality or of its self-alienation; but the other is
that which Spirit, rising above the first, constructs for itself in
the Aether of pure consciousness. This second world, standing
in antithesis to that alienation, is for that very reason not free
from it; on the contrary, it is really only the other form of that
alienation which consists precisely in being conscious of two dif¬
ferent worlds, and which embraces both. Therefore, it is not
the self-consciousness of absolute being as it is in and for itself
not religion, that is here dealt with but Faith, so far as this is
a flight from the real world and thus is not in and for itself This
flight from the realm of the present is, therefore, in its own self
dual-natured. Pure consciousness is the element into which
Spirit raises itself, but it is not only the element of Faith, but
equally of the Notion. Consequently, both together make their
appearance at the same time, and the former comes into con¬
sideration only in its antithesis to the latter.


a. Culture and its realm of actuality

488. The Spirit of this world is a spiritual essence that is per¬
meated by a self-consciousness which knows itself, and knows
the essence as an actuality confronting it. But the existence of
this world, as also the actuality of self-consciousness, rests on
the process in which the latter divests itself of its personality,
thereby creating its world. This world it looks on as something
alien, a world, therefore, of which it must now take possession.
But the renunciation of its being-for-self is itself the product of
the actual world, and by this renunciation, therefore, self-con¬
sciousness directly takes possession of this world. Or we may
say that self-consciousness is merely a ‘something 5 , it has actu¬
ality only in so far as it alienates itself from itself; by so doing,
it gives itself the character of a universal, and this its universality
is its authentication and actuality. This equality with everyone
is, therefore, not the equality of the sphere of legal right, not
that immediate recognition and validity of self-consciousness
simply because it w; on the contrary, to be valid it must have
conformed itself to the universal by the mediating process of
alienation. The non-spiritual universality of the sphere of legal
right accepts every natural form of character as well as of exist¬
ence and justifies them. The universality which counts here,


2 9 8 C. (BB.) SPIRIT

however, is one that has made itselfwhat it is and for that reason
is actual.

489. It is therefore through culture that the individual
acquires standing and actuality. His true original nature and sub¬
stance is the alienation of himself as Spirit from his natural being.
This externalization is, therefore, both the purpose and the ex¬
istence of the individual; it is at once the means , or the transition ,
both of the [mere] thought-form of substance into actuality , and,
conversely, of the specific individuality into essentiality . This indivi¬
duality moulds itself by culture into what it intrinsically is, and
only by so doing is it an intrinsic being that has an actual exist¬
ence; the measure of its culture is the measure of its actuality
and power. Although here the self knows itself as this self, yet
its actuality consists solely in the setting-aside of its natural self.
Consequently, the originally specific nature is reduced to the un¬
essential difference of quantity, to a greater or lesser energy of
will. But the purpose and content of the will belong solely to
the universal substance itself and can only be a universal. The
particularity of a nature which becomes purpose and content is
something powerless and unreal; it is a ( kind 3 of being which
vainly and ridiculously strains every nerve to get going; it is
the contradiction of giving to what is particular an actuality
which is immediately a universal. If, therefore, individuality
is erroneously supposed to be rooted in the particularity of nature
and character, then in the actual world there are no individuali¬
ties and no characters, but everyone is like everyone else; but
this presumed individuality really only exists in someone’s
mind, an imaginary existence which has no abiding place in this
world, where only that which externalizes itself, and, therefore,
only the universal, obtains an actual existence. That is why such
an imagined existence is esteemed for what it is, for a kind of
being. ‘Kind’ is not quite the same as espece, ‘the most horrid
of all nicknames; for it denotes mediocrity and expresses the
highest degree of contempt’. 1 ‘Kind’ and ‘good of its kind’ are,
however, German expressions which add an air of honesty to
this meaning, as if it were not really meant so badly; or, again,
consciousness is, in fact, not yet aware what ‘kind’, and what
‘culture’ and ‘reality’ are.

490. What, in relation to the single individual , appears as his

1 Diderot, Nephew of Rameau.


CULTURE


299


culture, is the essential moment of the substance itself, viz. the
immediate passage of the [mere] thought-form of its uni¬
versality into actuality; or, culture is the simple soul of the
substance by means of which, what is implicit in the substance,
acquires an acknowledged , real existence. The process in which the
individuality moulds itself by culture is, therefore, at the same
time the development of it as the universal, objective essence,
i.e. the development of the actual world. Although this world
has come into being through individuality, it is for self-con¬
sciousness immediately an alienated world which has the form
of a fixed and solid reality over against it. But at the same time,
certain that this world is its substance, it sets about making it
its own. It gains this power over it through culture which,
looked at from this aspect, has the appearance of self-conscious¬
ness making itself conform to reality, and doing so to the extent
that the energy of its original character and talent permits.
What appears here as the power and authority of the individual
exe r cised over the substance, which is thereby superseded, is
the same thing as the actualization of the substance. For the
power of the individual consists in conforming itself to that sub¬
stance, i.e. in externalizing its own self and thus establishing
itself as substance that has an objective existence. Its culture
and its own actuality are, therefore, the actualization of the sub¬
stance itself.

491. The self knows itself as actual only as a transcended self.
Therefore, it is not constituted by the unity of consciousness of
itself and the object; on the contrary, the object is, for the self,
its negative. Thus, by means of the self as soul of the process,
substance is so moulded and developed in its moments that one
opposite stirs the other into life, each by its alienation from the
other gives it an existence and equally receives from it an exist¬
ence of its own. At the same time, each moment possesses its
own specific nature as something unchallengeably valid and as
a firm reality vis-a-vis the other. Thinking fixes this difference
in the most general way by the absolute antithesis of good and
bad which, shunning each other, cannot in any way become
one and the same. The soul of this fixed being, however, is the
immediate transition into its opposite; existence is really the
perversion of every determinateness into its opposite, and it is
only this alienation that is the essential nature and support of


300


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


the whole. We have now to consider this process in which the
moments are stirred into life and given an existence of their
own; the alienation will alienate itself, and the whole will,
through this alienation, return into its Notion.

492. We have first to consider the simple unitary substance
itself in the immediate organization of its moments, which are
present in the substance but as yet have not been stirred into
life. In the same way that Nature displays itself in the universal
elements of Air, Water, Fire, and Earth: Air is the enduring,
purely universal, and transparent element; Water, the element
that is perpetually sacrificed; Fire, the unity which energizes
them into opposition while at the same time it perpetually
resolves the opposition; lastly, Earth, which is the firm and solid
knot of this articulated whole, the subject of thiese elements and
of their process, that from which they start and to which they
return; so in the same way, the inner essence or simple Spirit
of self-conscious actuality displays itself in similar such uni¬
versal—but here spiritual—‘masses’ or spheres, displays itself
as a world. In the first sphere it is an implicitly universal, self¬
identical spiritual being; in the second it is explicitly for itself
and has become inwardly divided against itself, sacrificing and
abandoning itself; in the third, which as self-consciousness is
Subject, it possesses directly in its own self the force of Fire.
In the first it is conscious of itself as an intrinsic being; but in
the second it develops an explicit being of its own by sacrificing
the universal. Spirit, however, is itself at once the essence and
the actuality of the whole, which sunders itself into a substance
which endures, and a substance which sacrifices itself, and
which at the same time also takes them back into its unity; it
is both the outburst of flaming Fire which consumes the sub¬
stance, and also the abiding form of that substance. We see
that these spheres correspond to the community and the family
in the ethical world, without, however, possessing the native
Spirit peculiar to the latter. On the other hand, while Destiny
is alien to this Spirit, here self-consciousness is and knows itself
to be the real power of these spheres.

493. We have to consider how, in the first instance, these
two members are represented within pure consciousness as
thoughts, or as having only an implicit being; and also how they
are represented in actual consciousness as having an objective


CULTURE


301


existence. In the simple form of thoughts, the first is the Good—
the self-accordant, immediate, and unchangeable essence of
every consciousness, the independent spiritual power of the in -
itself\ alongside which the activity of actual consciousness is
something merely incidental. Its other, on the contrary, is the
passive spiritual essence, or the universal in so far as it surrenders
itself and allows individuals to get in it the consciousness of their
separate existence; it is the essence that is null and invalid, the
Bad. This absolute break-up of the essence is itself permanent.
While the first essence is the foundation, starting-point, and
result of individuals who in it are purely universal, the second,
on the other hand, is partly their self-sacrificing being-for-
another, and partly, for that very reason, their perpetual
return-to-self as separate individuals and the perpetual process
in which they develop a being of their own.

494. But [secondly], these simple thoughts of Good and Bad
are likewise immediately self-alienated; they are actual and are
present in actual consciousness as objective moments. Thus the
first essence is state power , the other is wealth . As state power is
the simple substance , so too is it the universal ‘work’ —the absolute
‘heart of the matter’ itself in which individuals find their essential
nature expressed, and where their separate individuality is
merely a consciousness of their universality. It is also the ‘work’
and the simple result from which the sense that it results from
their doing has vanished; it remains the absolute foundation and
subsistence of all that they do. This simple , ethereal substance
of their life is, in virtue of this determination of their unchange¬
able self-identity, [mere] being and, in addition, merely a being-
for-another. It is thus directly the opposite of itself, wealth.
Although this is indeed something passive, something devoid
of inner worth, it is equally the perpetually produced result of
the labour and activity of all, just as it is dissipated again in
the enjoyment of all. It is true that in the enjoyment, the indivi¬
duality develops an awareness of himself as a particular indivi¬
dual, but this enjoyment itself is the result of the general
activity, just as reciprocally, wealth produces universal labour
and enjoyment for all. The actual has simply the spiritual sig¬
nificance of being immediately universal. Each individual is
quite sure that he is acting in his own interest when seeking
this enjoyment; for it is in this that he becomes conscious of


302


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


his own independent existence and for that reason does not take
it to be something spiritual. Yet, even when looked at from an
external point of view, it is evident that each in his own
enjoyment provides enjoyment for all, just as in working for
himself he is at the same time working for all and all are working
for him. His being for himself is therefore in itself universal and
his self-interest is something merely in his mind, something that
cannot get as far as making a reality of what it means to do,
viz. to do something that would not benefit all.

495. In these two spiritual powers, then, self-consciousness
recognizes its substance, content, and purpose; in them it
beholds its dual nature: in one it sees what it implicitly is, in
the other what it is explicitly for itself. But it is at the same time,
qua Spirit, the negative unity of their subsistence and of the
separation of individuality from the universal, or of actuality
and the self. Dominion and wealth therefore confront the
individual as objects, i.e. as things from which he knows himself
to be free, and between which he believes he can choose, or
even choose neither. As this free and pure consciousness he con¬
fronts the essence as something which is merely for him. He has,
then, the essence, qua essence, within himself. In this pure con¬
sciousness the moments of substance are for him not state power
and wealth, but the thoughts of Good and Bad. But further, self-
consciousness is the relation of its pure consciousness to its actual
consciousness, of what is in the form of thought to what exists
objectively: it is essentially judgement. It is true that the imme¬
diate determinations of the two sides of objective reality have
already made clear which is Good and which is Bad; the Good
is state power, the Bad is wealth. But this first judgement cannot
be regarded as a spiritual judgement; for in it one side has been
determined only as a bein g-in-itself or as the positive, the other
only as a bein g-for-itself and as the negative. But as spiritual
essences each is the interfusion of both moments, and is there¬
fore not exhausted in those determinations; and self-conscious¬
ness which is self-related is both in and for itself. It must there¬
fore be related to each determination in a twofold manner, with
the result that their nature, which consists in being self-
alienated determinations, will be brought to light.

496. Now, self-consciousness holds that object to be good,
and to possess intrinsic being, in which it finds itself; and that


CULTURE


303


to be bad in which it finds the opposite of itself. Goodness is
the likeness of objective reality to it, Badness, however, their
unlikeness. At the same time, what for self-consciousness is good
and bad, is intrinsically good and bad; for it is just that in which
these two moments of intrinsic being, and of being/or it, are the
same. It is the actual Spirit of the objective realities, and the
judgement is the proof of its power within them, a power which
makes them into what they are in themselves. It is not how they
are like or unlike directly in themselves, i.e. not abstract being-
in-itselfor being-for-itself, that is their criterion and their truth,
but how they are in the relation of Spirit to them: their likeness
or unlikeness to Spirit. Spirit’s relation to them, in virtue of
which they lose their initial status of objects and develop their
own in-itself or intrinsic nature, becomes at the same time their
reflection into themselves , through which they acquire an actual
spiritual being; and what their Spirit is, comes to view. But
just as their first immediate determination is distinct'from the rela¬
tion of Spirit to them, so also will the third moment, their
own proper Spirit, be distinct from the second. First of all,
their second in-itself\ which stems from the relation of Spirit
to them, must, of course, turn out to be different from
the immediate in-itself; for this mediation of Spirit rather acts
on the immediate determinateness and makes it into something
else.

497. It follows, then, that the consciousness that is in and
for itself does find in the state power its simple essence and sub¬
sistence in general, but not its individuality as such; it does find
there its intrinsic being, but not what it explicitly is for itself.
Rather, it finds that the state power disowns action qua indivi¬
dual action and subdues it into obedience. The individual,
therefore, faced with this power reflects himself into himself;
it is for him an oppressor and the Bad; for, instead of being
of like nature to himself, its nature is essentially different from
that of individuality. Wealth, on the other hand, is the Good;
it leads to the general enjoyment, is there to be made use of,
and procures for everyone the consciousness of his particular
self. It is implicitly universal beneficence; if it refuses a particular
benefit and does not choose to satisfy every need, this is acciden¬
tal and does not detract from its universal and necessary nature
of imparting itself to all and being a universal provider.


3 o 4 C - ( BB ) SPIRIT

498. These two judgements give the thoughts of Good and
Bad a content which is the opposite of what they had for us.
But self-consciousness was at first only incompletely related to
its objects, viz. only according to the criterion of being-for-self.
Consciousness has equally, however, an intrinsic nature of its own
and must likewise make this aspect a criterion, and only when
it has done this is the spiritual judgement complete. According
to this aspect, the state power expresses its essence ; this power
is in part the established law, and in part government and com¬
mand, which regulates the particular activities within the
action of the whole. The one is the simple Substance itself, the
other is its action which animates and sustains itself and every¬
one. The individual thus finds therein his ground and essence
expressed, organized, and manifested. On the other hand, the
individual, through the enjoyment of wealth, gains no experi¬
ence of his universal nature, but only gets a transitory conscious¬
ness and enjoyment of himself qua single and independent in¬
dividual, and of the disparity between himself and his essence.
The Notions of Good and Bad thus receive here a content which
is the opposite of what they had before.

499. Each of these two ways of judging finds a likeness and
a disparity; in the first case consciousness judges the state power
to be essentially different from it, and the enjoyment of wealth
to accord with its own nature; while in the second case it judges
the state power to accord with its nature and the enjoyment
of wealth to be essentially different from it. We have before us
a twofold finding of likeness and a twofold finding of disparity,
an antithetical relation between the two real essentialities. We
must ourselves judge these different judgements and apply to
them the criterion set up. According to this, the conscious rela¬
tion which finds likeness is the Good; that which finds disparity
is the Bad; and these two forms of the relation we are henceforth
to hold fast as diverse shapes of consciousness. By forming
diverse relationships, consciousness itself comes to be deter¬
mined as diverse, as being good or bad; not because it had for
its principle either being-for-itself or pure being-in-itself, for
both are equally essential moments. In the twofold judging con¬
sidered above, the principles were thought of as separate, and
therefore contained merely abstract ways ofjudging. Actual con¬
sciousness has within it both principles, and the distinction


CULTURE


305

between them falls solely within its own essence, viz. in the rela¬
tion of itself to the actual.

500. There are two antithetical forms of this relation: one
is a relationship to the state power and wealth as to something
of like nature to itself; the other as to something disparate from
it. The consciousness which finds them of like nature to itself
is noble. It sees in public authority what is in accord with itself,
sees in it its own simple essence and the factual evidence of it,
and in the service of that authority its attitude towards it is one
of actual obedience and respect. Similarly, in the case of wealth,
it sees that this procures for it awareness of its other essential
side, the consciousness of being for itself ; it therefore looks upon
wealth likewise as essential in relation to itself, and acknowledges
the source of its enjoyment as a benefactor to whom it lies under
an obligation.

5 01 * The consciousness which adopts the other relation is,
on the contrary, ignoble. It clings tc the disparity between the
two essentialities, thus sees in the sovereign power a fetter and
a suppression of its own being-for-self and therefore hates the
ruler, obeys only with a secret malice, and is always on the point
of revolt. It sees, too, in wealth, by which it attains to the
enjoyment of its own self-centred existence, only the disparity
with its permanent essence] since through wealth it becomes con¬
scious of itself merely as an isolated individual, conscious only
of a transitory enjoyment, loving yet hating wealth, and with
the passing of the enjoyment, of something that is essentially
evanescent, it regards its relation to the rich as also having
vanished.

502. Now, these relations express, in the first instance, the
judgement , the determination, of what these two essential reali¬
ties are as objects for consciousness, not as yet what they are in
and for themselves. The reflection which is presented in the
judgement is partly an affirmation of the one as of the other
only for us, and is therefore an equal annulling of both; it is
not yet the reflection of them for consciousness itself. Partly,
at first, they simply are essences , they have not become such, nor
do they possess ^//^-consciousness: that for which they are is not
that which animates them, they are predicates which are not
...«,mselves subject. On account of this separation, the whole
of the spiritual judgement falls apart into two consciousnesses,


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


306

each of which is subject to a one-sided determination. Now,
just as at first the indifference of the two sides of the alienation—
one of which was the in-itself of pure consciousness, viz. the spe¬
cific thoughts of Good and Bad, the other their existence as state
power and wealth—was raised into a relation between them,
into a judgement, so must this external relation be raised to
an inner unity, or to a relation of thought to actuality, and the
Spirit of both forms of the judgement must make its appearance.
This happens when the judgement becomes a syllogism, i.e.
becomes the mediating process in which the necessity and the
middle term of both sides of the judgement come to view.

503. The noble consciousness thus finds itself, in the judge¬
ment, confronting the state power in such a way that the latter
is, indeed, not yet a self, but only the universal substance; it
is, however, conscious of being the essence of that substance, its
end and absolute content. Being so positively related to it,
it adopts a negative attitude to its own ends, to its particular
content and existence, and lets them vanish. This consciousness
is the heroism of service , the virtue which sacrifices the single in¬
dividual to the universal, thereby bringing this into existence—
the person , one who voluntarily renounces possessions and
enjoyment and acts and is effective in the interests of the ruling
power.

504. Through this process the universal becomes united with
existence in general, just as the [merely] existent consciousness
through this renunciation develops into an essential existence.
That from which this consciousness alienates itself in serving
the universal is the consciousness that is immersed in [mere]
existence; but the being that is alienated from itself is the in -
itself. Through this development, therefore, it wins self-respect
and the respect of others. The state power, however, which was
at first only the universal in thought , the in-itself\ becomes
through this very process the universal in existence , actual power.
This it actually is only in the actual obedience which it gets
through self-consciousness judging the state power to be the
essence , and through the free sacrifice of self-consciousness to it.
This action which unites the essence with the self produces the
twofold actuality: the self that has a true actuality, and the state
power as the True which is acknowledged as such.

5 ° 5 * Through this alienation, however, the state power is not


CULTURE


307


a self-consciousness that knows itself as state power. It is only
its law , or its in-itself\ that has authority; it has as yet no particular
will. For the self-consciousness that serves the state power has
not as yet renounced its own pure self and made it the active
principle of the state power; it has only given that power its
mere being, has only sacrificed its outer existence to it, not its in¬
trinsic being. This self-consciousness is deemed to be in con¬
formity with the essence and is acknowledged on account of what
it intrinsically is. In it the others find their own essence exempli¬
fied, but not their own being-for-self—find their thought, or
pure consciousness, fulfilled, but not their individuality. It
therefore possesses authority in their thoughts and enjoys honour.
It is the haughty vassal who is active on behalf of the state power
in so far as the latter is not a personal will, but an essential will;
the vassal who knows himself to be esteemed only in that honour,
only in the essential representation of him in general opinion,
not in the gratitude shown to him by an individuality, for he
has not helped this individuality to gratify his being-for-self. His
language, were he to stand in relation to the state power which
has not yet come into being, would take the form of counsel,
imparted for the general good.

506. State power, therefore, still lacks a will with which to
oppose counsel, and the power to decide which of the different
opinions is best for the general good. It is not yet a government,
and therefore not yet in truth an actual state power. The being-
for-self the will, which, as will is not sacrificed, is the inner,
separated Spirit of the various classes and ‘estates’, and this,
in spite of its chatter about the general good, reserves to itself
what suits its own best interest, and is inclined to make this chat¬
ter about the general good a substitute for action. The sacrifice
of existence which happens in the service of the state is indeed
complete when it has gone as far as death; but the hazard of
death which the individual survives leaves him with a definite
existence and hence with a particular self-interest, and this makes
his counsel about what is best for the general good ambiguous
and open to suspicion. It means that he has in fact reserved
his own opinion and his own particular will in face of the power
of the state. His conduct, therefore, conflicts with the interests
of the state and is characteristic of the ignoble consciousness
which is always on the point of revolt.


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


308

507. This contradiction which being-for-self must resolve,
that of the disparity between its being-for-self and the state
power, is at the same time present in the following form. That
renunciation of existence, when it is complete, as it is in death,
is simply a renunciation; it does not return into consciousness;
consciousness does not survive the renunciation, is not in and
for itself but merely passes over into its unreconciled opposite.
Consequently, the true sacrifice of being-for-self solely that in
which it surrenders itself as completely as in death, yet in this
renunciation no less preserves itself. It thereby becomes in actu¬
ality what it is in itself, becomes the identical unity of itself and
of its opposed self. The separated inner Spirit, the self as such,
having come forward and renounced itself, the state power is
at the same time raised to the position of having a self of its
own. Without this renunciation of self, the deeds of honour, the
deeds of the noble consciousness, and the counsels based on its
insight would retain the ambiguity possessed by that private
reserve of particular intention and self-will.

508. But this alienation takes place solely in language , which
here appears in its characteristic significance. In the world of
ethical order, in law and command , and in the actual world, in
counsel only, language has the essence for its content and is the
form of that content; but here it has for its content the form
itself, the form which language itself is, and is authoritative as
language. It is the power of speech, as that which performs what
has to be performed. For it is the real existence of the pure self
as self; in speech, self-consciousness, qua independent separate in-

ividuality , comes as such into existence, so that it exists for others .

therwise the T, this pure T, is non-existent, is not there ; in
every other expression it is immersed in a reality, and is in a
? a R e / r ° m . W ^^ c ^. lt can withdraw itself; it is reflected back into
itse from its action, as well as from its physiognomic expres-
^ s f oc ^ ates itself from such an imperfect existence, in
w ich there is always at once too much as too little, letting it
remain lifeless behind. Language, however, contains it in its
purity, it alone expresses the ‘I’, the T itself. This real existence
o t e I is, qua real existence, an objectivity which has in it
the true nature of the T. The T is this particular T—but
equally the universally ; its manifesting is also at once the exter-
nalization and vanishing of this particular ‘I’, and as a result


CULTURE


3<>9

the T remains in its universality. The T that utters itself is
heard or perceived ; it is an infection in which it has immediately
passed into unity with those for whom it is a real existence, and
is a universal self-consciousness. That it is perceived or heard
means that its real existence dies away ; this its otherness has been
taken back into itself; and its real existence is just this: that
as a self-conscious Now, as a real existence, it is not a real exist¬
ence, and through this vanishing it is a real existence. This
vanishing is thus itself at once its abiding; it is its own knowing
of itself, and its knowing itself as a self that has passed over into
another self that has been perceived and is universal.

509. Spirit obtains this actuality here because the extremes,
of which it is the unity, are also directly determined as being
actualities on their own account. Their unity is broken up into
two rigid, unyielding sides, each of which is for the other an
actual object excluded from it. Consequently, the unity appears
as a middle term , which is excluded and distinct from the
separated, actual existence of the sides; it has, therefore, itself
an actual objective existence distinct from its sides, and has
reality for them , i.e. is something that exists. The spiritual sub¬
stance enters as such into existence only when it has gained for
its two sides self-consciousnesses which know this pure self as
an actual existence having immediate validity , and in knowing
this are also immediately aware that they are such actual exist¬
ences only through the mediation of their self-alienation.
Through that pure self, the moments of substance are so far
purified as to be the self-knowing category, and thus to be
moments of Spirit; through this mediation Spirit comes to exist
qua Spirit as a reality. It is thus the middle term which presup¬
poses those extremes and is created by their existence—but
equally it is the spiritual whole issuing forth between them,
which sunders itself into them and only by means of this contact
creates each into the whole in terms of its own principle. The
fact that both extremes are already implicitly reduced to
moments and set apart produces their unity, and this is the pro¬
cess which brings both into a unity, interchanges their determi¬
nations, and unites them in each extreme. This mediation thus
posits the Notion of each of the two extremes in its actuality,
or makes what each is in itself into its Spirit.

510. The two extremes, the state power and the noble


3 io


C. (BB.) SPIRIT

consciousness, are split up by the latter: the state power into the
abstract universal which is obeyed, and into the self-centred
will which, however, does not yet conform to the universal; and
the noble consciousness into the obedience rendered by the ex¬
istence which is not self-centred, or the intrinsic being of self-re¬
spect and honour, and into the still unsurrendered being-for-
self, the will that still reserves its independence. The two
moments into which both sides are purified and which, there¬
fore, are moments of language, are the abstract universal , called
‘the general good’, and the pure self which, in serving the state,
renounced its own many and various interests. Both are essenti¬
ally the same; for pure self is just the abstract universal, and
consequently their unity is expressed as their middle term. But
the self is at first actual only in consciousness, in the one extreme,
while the in-its elf is actual only in the state power, the other
extreme. What consciousness lacks is the actual transference to
it of the state power, not merely in the form of honour ; and what
is lacking in the state power is that it should be obeyed, not
merely as the so-called ‘general good 5 , but as will, or that it
should endow the self with the power of decision. The unity
of the Notion in which the state power still stands and into
which consciousness has been purified becomes actual in this
process of mediation, the simple existence of which as middle term
is language. However, the sides of the unity are not yet selves
which exist as selves; for the state power has yet to be energized
into a self. This language is, therefore, not yet Spirit that com¬
pletely knows and expresses itself.

511. The noble consciousness, being the extreme which is the
self, appears as the source of the language by which the sides
of the relation are shaped into animated wholes. The heroism
of silent service becomes the heroism of flattery. This vocal re¬
flection of service constitutes the spiritual self-separating middle
term and reflects back into itself not only its own extreme, but
also reflects back into this self the extreme of universal power,
making that power, which is at first only implicit, into a power
that is explicit with an existence of its own, makes it into a self-
conscious individuality. The result is that the Spirit of this power
is now an unlimited monarch : unlimited , because the language of
flattery raises this power into its purified universality ; this
moment being the product of language, of an existence which


CULTURE


3i *

has been purified into Spirit, is a purified self-identity; a
monarch , for such language likewise raises individuality to its
extreme point; what the noble consciousness divests itself of as
regards this aspect of the simple spiritual unity is the pure in¬
trinsic being of its thinking , its very T. Expressed more definitely,
it raises the individuality, which otherwise is only a presumed
existence, into the existence of its pure form, by giving the
monarch his own proper name ; for it is in the name alone that
the difference of the individual from everyone else is not presumed ,
but is made actual by all. In the name, the individual counts as
a pure individual, no longer only in his own consciousness, but
in the consciousness of everyone. By his name, then, the
monarch is absolutely separated off from everyone else, exclu¬
sive and solitary; as monarch, he is a unique atom that cannot
impart any of its essential nature. This name is thus the reflec-
tion-into-self, or the actuality which the universal power has in
its own self; through the name the power is the monarch. Con¬
versely, he, this particular individual, thereby knows himself,
this individual, to be the universal power, knows that the nobles
not only are ready and prepared for the service of the state
power, but that they group themselves round the throne as an
ornamental setting, and that they are continually telling him who
sits on it what he is.

512. The language of their praise is in this way the Spirit
that in the. state power itself unites the two extremes. It reflects the
abstract power into itself and gives it the moment of the other
extreme, the being-for-self that wills and decides, and by so doing
gives it a self-conscious existence; or otherwise expressed, this
individual, actual self-consciousness attains to the certain know¬
ledge of itself as the power of the state. It is the point of the self
into which the many points or selves through renouncing their
own inner certainty) are fused into one. Since, however, this Spirit
proper of state power consists in its obtaining actuality and
nourishment from the sacrifice of action and thought by the
noble consciousness, it is an independence that is self-alienated ; the
noble consciousness, the extreme of being-for-self) receives back
the other extreme, that of actual universality , in return for the
universality of thought which it relinquished; the power of the
state has passed to the noble consciousness. In it, that power is
first made truly effective; in the being-for-self of the noble


312


C. (BB.) SPIRIT

consciousness it ceases to be the inert entity which it appeared to
be as the extreme of abstract being-in-itself. Considered as it
is in itself, state power that is reflected into itself, or has become
Spirit, simply means that it has become a moment of self-con¬
sciousness, i.e. it exists only as superseded. Consequently, it is now
essence in the form of something, the Spirit of which is that it
is to be sacrified and surrendered, i.e. it exists as wealth. It does,
indeed, at the same time have a continuing existence as a reality
vis-a-vis wealth, into which it is ever changing in accordance with
its Notion; but it is a reality whose Notion is just this process
of passing over—by way of the service and honour done to it
and from which it derives its existence—into its opposite, into
the relinquishment of power. Thus the peculiar self that is its
will knows that through the debasement of the noble conscious¬
ness it has become a universality that renounces itself, has
become a completely separate and contingent individuality
which is at the mercy of every more powerful will. What
remains to it of universally acknowledged and incommunicable
independence is the empty name.

513. While, therefore, the noble consciousness behaves as if
it were conforming to the universal power, the truth about it is
rather that in its service it retains its own being-for-self, and
that in the genuine renunciation of its personality, it actually
sets aside and rends in pieces the universal Substance. Its Spirit
is a completely disparate relationship: on the one hand, in its
position of honour it retains its own will; on the other hand,
it gives up its will, but in so doing it in part alienates itself from
its own inner nature and becomes utterly at variance with itself,
and in part subjects to itself the universal substance and makes
it completely at variance with itself. It is clear that, as a result,
the specific character which it was judged to have in compari¬
son with what was called the ignoble consciousness has dis¬
appeared and with it the latter too. The ignoble consciousness
has achieved its purpose, viz. to bring the universal power
under the control of being-for-self.

514. Self-consciousness, thus enriched by the universal
power, exists as universal beneficence, or is wealth which is itself
in turn an object for consciousness. For although wealth is, for
consciousness, the deposed universal, the latter has not yet by
this first subjection returned absolutely into the self. The self


CULTURE


3*3


has not yet for object itself qua self, but the subordinated uni¬
versal essence. Since this object has only just come into being,
consciousness has formed an immediate relation with it and thus
has not yet exhibited its disparity with it; we have here the
noble consciousness which preserves its being-for-self in the uni¬
versal which has become unessential, and therefore acknow¬
ledges the object and is grateful to the benefactor.

515. Wealth already contains within it the moment of being-
for-self. It is not the self-less universal of state power, or the
naive inorganic nature of Spirit; it is state power which wills
to hold its own against those who would take possession of it
for their own enjoyment. But since wealth has merely the form
of essence, this one-sided being-for-self which has no intrinsic
being of its own, but is rather the cancelling of it, is in its
enjoyment the essenceless return of the individual into himself.
It therefore itself requires to be ensouled; and the movement
of its reflection consists in this, that wealth which is only for itself,
develops an intrinsic being of its own , that, instead of being a can¬
celled essence, it develops an essential being. It thus receives
within itself a Spirit of its own. Since the form of this movement
has already been set forth in detail, it is sufficient here to charac¬
terize its content.

516. The noble consciousness, then, is not related here to the
object as an essence in general; on the contrary, what is alien
to it is its own beingfor-self It finds confronting it its own, but
alienated, self as such, in the shape of an objective fixed reality
which it has to receive from another fixed being-for-self. Its
object is a being-for-self, i.e. its own being-for-self; but, because
it is an object, it is at the same time ipso facto an alien reality
which has its own being-for-self, which has a will of its own;
i.e. it sees self in the power of an alien will on which it is depen¬
dent for possession of its own self.

517. Self-consciousness can make abstraction from every
particular aspect, and for that reason, even when it is tied to
one of them, it retains the recognition and intrinsic validity of
itself as an independent being. Here, however, as regards the
aspect of that pure actuality which is its very own, viz. its own
T, it finds that it is outside of itself and belongs to another,
finds its personality as such dependent on the contingent per¬
sonality of another, on the accident of a moment, on a caprice,


3 i 4 C. (BB.) SPIRIT

or some other utterly unimportant circumstance. In the sphere
of law, what is in the power of an objective being appears as
a contingent content from which it is possible to make abstraction,
and the controlling power does not affect the self as such ; on
the contrary, the self is acknowledged. Here, however, the self
sees its self-certainty as such to be completely devoid of essence,
sees that its pure personality is absolutely not a personality. The
spirit of its gratitude is, therefore, the feeling of the most pro¬
found dejection as well as of extreme rebellion. When the pure
T beholds itself outside of itself and rent asunder, then every¬
thing that has continuity and universality, everything that is
called law, good, and right, is at the same time rent asunder
and is destroyed. All identity dissolves away, for the utmost dis¬
parity now occupies the scene; what is absolutely essential is
now absolutely unessential, being-for-self is now external to
itself: the pure T itself is absolutely disrupted.

518. Therefore, although this consciousness receives back
from riches the objectivity of its being-for-self and supersedes
it, it is not only, like the preceding reflection, incomplete in
principle, but is conscious of not being satisfied; the reflection,
in which the self receives itself as something objective to it, is
thus a direct contradiction lodged in the pure ‘I 5 itself. Qua self,
however, it stands at the same time directly above this con¬
tradiction ; it is absolutely elastic and therefore again super¬
sedes this supersession of its self, rejects this disowning of itself
which would make its being-for-self into something alien, and
rebels against this reception of itself, and in this very reception
is conscious of itself

519. Since, then, the condition of this consciousness is linked
with this absolute disruption, the distinction within its Spirit
of being noble, as opposed to ignoble, falls away and both are
the same. The beneficent Spirit of wealth can, further, be distin¬
guished from that of the consciousness receiving the benefit, and
has to be considered separately. The Spirit of wealth was an
essenceless being-for-self, something to be sacrificed for others.
But by imparting itself it becomes intrinsic being ; in fulfilling its
destiny, which is to sacrifice itself, it rids itself of the singleness
which characterizes its merely self-centred enjoyment, and as
such subordinated individuality it is universality or essence. What
it imparts, what it gives to others, is being-for-self. It does not.


CULTURE


3'5


however, give itself over as a nature that has no self, as the un¬
controlled surrender of the condition of life, but as a self-con¬
scious being in control of itself; it is not the inorganic power
of the element that is known by the consciousness receiving it
to be essentially transitory, but is the power over the self, the
power that knows itself to be independent and arbitrary , and at the
same time knows that what it dispenses is the self of another.
Wealth thus shares its dejection with the recipient; but in place
of rebellion appears arrogance. For in one respect it knows as
well as the recipient that being-for-self is a contingent Thing;
but it is itself this contingency in the power of which personality
stands. In this arrogance which fancies it has, by the gift of a
meal, acquired the self of another’s T and thereby gained for
itself the submission of that other’s inmost being, it overlooks
the inner rebellion of the other; it overlooks the fact that all
restraints have been cast off, overlooks this state of sheer dis¬
ruption in which, the self-identity of being-for-self having
become divided against itself, all identity, all existence, is dis¬
rupted, and in which the sentiment and view-point of the bene¬
factor suffer most distortion. It stands on the very edge of this
innermost abyss, of this bottomless depth, in which all stability
and Substance have vanished; and in this depth it sees nothing
but a common thing, a plaything of its whims, an accident of
its caprice. Its Spirit is a subjective opinion wholly devoid of
essentiality, a superficiality from which Spirit has fled.

520. Just as self-consciousness had its own language with
state power, in other words, just as Spirit emerged as actively
mediating between these extremes, so also has self-consciousness
its own language in dealing with wealth; but still more so when
it rebels. The language that gives wealth a sense of its essential
significance, and thereby gains possession of it, is likewise the
language of flattery, but of base flattery; for what it pronounces
to be an essence, it knows to be expendable, to be without any
intrinsic being. The language of flattery, however, as we have
already observed, is Spirit that is still one-sided. For although
its moments are indeed the self which has been refined by the
discipline of service into a pure existence, and the intrinsic being
of power, yet the pure Notion in which the simple, unitary self
and the in-itself the former a pure T and the latter this pure
essence or thought, are the same-—this unity of the two sides


3l6 C. (BB.) SPIRIT

which are in reciprocal relation is not present in the conscious¬
ness that uses this language. The object is still for consciousness
an intrinsic being in contrast to the self, that is, the object is not
for consciousness at the same time consciousness’s own self as
such. The language of this disrupted consciousness is, however,
the perfect language and the authentic existent Spirit of this
entire world of culture. This self-consciousness which rebels
against this rejection of itself is eo ipso absolutely self-identical
in its absolute disruption, the pure mediation of pure self-con¬
sciousness with itself. It is the sameness of the identical judge¬
ment in which one and the same personality is both subject and
predicate. But this identical judgement is at the same time the
infinite judgement; for this personality is absolutely dirempted,
and subject and predicate are utterly indifferent, immediate
beings which have nothing to do with one another, which have
no necessary unity, so much so that each is the power of a separ¬
ate independent personality. The being-for-self [of this con¬
sciousness] has its own being-for-self for object as an out-and-
out ‘other’, and yet, at the same time, directly as its own self
itself as an ‘other’; not as if this had a different content, for
the content is the same self in the form of an absolute antithesis
and a completely indifferent existence of its own. Here, then,
we have the Spirit of this real world of culture, Spirit that is
conscious of itself in its truth and in its Notion.

521. It is this absolute and universal inversion and alienation
of the actual world and of thought; it is pure culture. What is
learnt in this world is that neither the actuality of power and
wealth, nor their specific Notions , ‘good’ and ‘bad’, or the con¬
sciousness of‘good’ and ‘bad’ (the noble and the ignoble con¬
sciousness), possess truth; on the contrary, all these moments
become inverted, one changing into the other, and each is the
opposite of itself. The universal power, which is the Substance ,
when it acquires a spiritual nature of its own through the prin¬
ciple of individuality, receives its own self merely as a name,
and though it is the actuality of power, is really the powerless
being that sacrifices its own self. But this expendable, self-less
being, or the self that has become a Thing, is rather the return
of that being into itself; it is being-for-self that is explicitly for
itself, the concrete existence of Spirit. The thoughts of these two
essences, of‘good’ and ‘bad’, are similarly inverted in this move-


CULTURE


3*7


ment; what is characterized as good is bad, and vice versa. The
consciousness of each of these moments, the consciousnesses
judged as noble and ignoble, are rather in their truth just as
much the reverse of what these characterizations are supposed
to be; the noble consciousness is ignoble and repudiated, just
as the repudiated consciousness changes round into the nobility
which characterizes the most highly developed freedom of self-
consciousness. From a formal standpoint, everything is out -
wardly the reverse of what it is for itself ; and, again, it is not
in truth what it is for itself, but something else than it wants
to be; being-for-self is rather the loss of itself, and its self-aliena¬
tion rather the preservation of itself. What we have here, then,
is that all the moments execute a universal justice on one
another, each just as much alienates its own self, as it forms
itself into its opposite and in this way inverts it. True Spirit,
however, is just this unity of the absolutely separate moments,
and, indeed, it is just through the free actuality of these self¬
less extremes that, as their middle term, it achieves a concrete
existence. It exists in the universal talk and destructive judge¬
ment which strips of their significance all those moments which
are supposed to count as the true being and as actual members
of the whole, and is equally this nihilistic game which it plays
with itself. This judging and talking is, therefore, what is true
and invincible, while it overpowers everything; it is solely with
this alone that one has truly to do with in this actual world.
In this world, the Spirit of each part finds expression, or is
wittily talked about, and finds said about it what it is. The honest
individual takes each moment to be an abiding essentiality, and
is the uneducated thoughtlessness of not knowing that it is
equally doing the reverse. The disrupted consciousness, how¬
ever, is consciousness of the perversion, and, moreover, of the
absolute perversion. What prevails in it is the Notion, which
brings together in a unity the thoughts which, in the honest
individual, lie far apart, and its language is therefore clever and
witty.

522. The content of what Spirit says about itself is thus the
perversion of every Notion and reality, the universal deception
of itself and others; and the shamelessness which gives utterance
to this deception is just for that reason the greatest truth. This
kind of talk is the madness of the musician ‘who heaped up and


3 1 8


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


mixed together thirty arias, Italian, French, tragic, comic, of
every sort; now with a deep bass he descended into hell, then,
contracting his throat, he rent the vaults of heaven with a fal¬
setto tone, frantic and soothed, imperious and mocking, by
turns’. 1 To the tranquil consciousnes which, in its honest way,
takes the melody of the Good and the True to consist in the
evenness of the notes, i.e. in unison, this talk appears as a ‘rig¬
marole of wisdom and folly, as a medley of as much skill as
baseness, of as many correct as false ideas, a mixture com¬
pounded of a complete perversion of sentiment, of absolute
shamefulness, and of perfect frankness and truth. It will be un¬
able to refrain from entering into all these tones and running
up and down the entire scale of feelings from the profoundest
contempt and dejection to the highest pitch of admiration and
emotion; but blended with the latter will be a tinge of ridicule
which spoils them.’ 2 The former, however, will find in their
very frankness a strain of reconciliation, will find in their sub¬
versive depths the all-powerful note which restores Spirit to
itself.

523. If we contrast with the speech of this mind which is fully
aware of its confused state, the speech of that simple conscious¬
ness of the true and the good, we find that in face of the frank
and self-conscious eloquence of the educated mind, it can be
no more than taciturn; for to the latter it can say nothing that
it does not already know and say. If it gets beyond speaking
in monosyllables, it says, therefore, the same thing that is said
by the educated mind, but in doing so also commits the folly
of imagining it is saying something new and different. Its very
words ‘shameful’, ‘ignoble’ are already this folly, for the other
says them about itself. This latter mind perverts in its speech
all that is unequivocal, because what is self-identical is only an
abstraction, but in its actual existence is in its own self a perver¬
sion. The plain mind, on the other hand, takes under its protec¬
tion the good and noble i.e. what retains its self-identity in
its utterance, in the only way here possible—that is to say, the
‘good’ does not lose its value because it may be associated or
mixed with the ‘bad’, for this is its condition and necessity, and
in this fact lies the wisdom of Nature. Yet this plain mind, while

1 Diderot, Nephew of Rameau.

2 ibid.


CULTURE


3 i 9


it imagined it was contradicting what was said, has, in doing
so, merely condensed into a trivial form the content of Spirit’s
utterance; in making the opposite of the noble and good into
the condition and necessity of the noble and good, it thoughtlessly
supposes itself to be saying something else than that what is
called noble and good is in its essence the reverse of itself, or
that, conversely, the ‘bad’ is the ‘excellent’.

524. If the simple consciousness compensates for this
dull, uninspired thought by the actuality of the excellent, by
adducing an example of the latter, either in the form of a fictitious
case or a true story, thus showing that it is no empty name
but actually exists, the universal actuality of the perverted
action stands opposed to the whole of the real world in which
the said example constitutes something quite single and
separate, an espece, a mere ‘sort’ of thing; and to represent the
existence of the good and noble as an isolated anecdote,
whether fictitious or true, is the most disparaging thing that
can be said about it. Finally, should the plain mind demand
the dissolution of this whole world of perversion, it cannot
demand of the individual that he remove himself from it, for even
Diogenes in his tub is conditioned by it, and to make this
demand of the individual is just what is reckoned to be bad,
viz. to care for himself qua individual. But if the demand for this
removal is directed to the universal individuality , it cannot mean
that Reason should give up again the spiritually developed con¬
sciousness it has acquired, should submerge the widespread
wealth of its moments again in the simplicity of the natural
heart, and relapse into the wilderness of the nearly animal con¬
sciousness, which is also called Nature or innocence. On the
contrary, the demand for this dissolution can only be directed
to the Spirit of culture itself, in order that it return out of its
confusion to itself as Spirit , and win for itself a still higher con¬
sciousness.

525. But in point of fact, Spirit has already accomplished
this in principle. The consciousness that is aware of its dis¬
ruption and openly declares it, derides existence and the uni¬
versal confusion, and derides its own self as well; it is at the
same time the fading, but still audible, sound of all this con¬
fusion. This vanity of all reality and every definite Notion,
vanity which knows itself to be such, is the double reflection


320


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


of the real world into itself: once in this particular self of con¬
sciousness qua particular, and again in the pure universality of
consciousness, or in thought. In the first case, Spirit that has
come to itself has directed its gaze to the world of actuality and
still has there its purpose and immediate content; but, in the
other case, its gaze is in part turned only inward and negatively
against it, and in part is turned away from that world towards
heaven, and its object is the beyond of this world.

526. In that aspect of the return into the self, the vanity of
all things is its own vanity, it is itself vain. It is the self-centred
self that knows, not only how to pass judgement on and chatter
about everything, but how to give witty expression to the con¬
tradiction that is present in the solid elements of the actual world,
as also in the fixed determinations posited by judgement; and
this contradiction is their truth. Looked at from the point of
view of form, it knows everything to be self-alienated, being-
for-self is separated from being-in-itself; what is meant, and
purpose, are separated from truth; and from both again, the
being-for-another, the ostensible meaning from the real mean-
ing, from the true thing and intention. Thus it knows how to
give correct expression to each moment in relation to its oppo-
sue, in general, how to express accurately the perversion of
everything; it knows better than each what each is, no matter
what its specific nature is. Since it knows the substantial from
the side of the disunion and conflict which are united within
the substantial itself, but not from the side of this union, it
understands very well how to pass judgement on it, but has lost
the ability to comprehend it. This vanity at the same time needs
the vanity of all things in order to get from them the conscious¬
ness of self; it therefore creates this vanity itself and is the soul
that supports it. Power and wealth are the supreme ends of its
exertions, it knows that through renunciation and sacrifice it
forms itself into the universal, attains to the possession of it, and
in this possession is universally recognized and accepted: state
power and wealth are the real and acknowledged powers. How¬
ever, this recognition and acceptance is itself vain; and just by
taking possession of power and wealth it knows them to be with¬
out a self of their own, knows rather that it is the power over
them, while they are vain things. The fact that in possessing
them it is itself apart from and beyond them, is exhibited in


CULTURE


32


its witty talk which is, therefore, its supreme interest and the
truth of the whole relationship. In such talk, this particular self,
qua this pure self, determined neither by reality nor by thought,
develops into a spiritual self that is of truly universal worth.
It is the self-disruptive nature of all relationships and the con¬
scious disruption of them; but only as self-consciousness in
revolt is it aware of its own disrupted state, and in thus knowing
it has immediately risen above it. In that vanity, all content
is turned into something negative which can no longer be
grasped as having a positive significance. The positive object
is merely the pure ( V itself\ and the disrupted consciousness in
itself this pure self-identity of self-consciousness that has
returned to itself.

b. Faith and pure insight

527. The Spirit of self-alienation has its existence in the
world of culture. But since this whole has become alienated
from itself, there stands beyond that world the unreal world
of pure consciousness , or of thought. Its content is in the form of
pure thought, and thought is its absolute element. Since, how¬
ever, thought is in the first instance [only] the element of this
world, consciousness only has these thoughts, but as yet it does
not think them, or is unaware that they are thoughts; they exist
for consciousness in the form of picture-thoughts. For it steps out
of its actual world into pure consciousness, yet is itself generally
still in the sphere of the actual world and its determinateness.
The disrupted consciousness is only in itself or implicitly, the
self-identity of pure consciousness, a fact that is known to us , but
not to itself. Thus, it is only the immediate elevation of itself, an
elevation it has not yet accomplished within itself, and it still
has within it its opposite principle by which it is conditioned,
without having become master of it through the movement
of mediation. Consequently, the essence of its thought has for
it the value of essence , not merely in the form of the abstract
in-itself but in the form of a common actuality , of an actuality
that has merely been raised into another element without hav¬
ing lost therein the specific character of an actuality that does
not exist merely in thought. It is essential to distinguish it from
the in-itself which is the essence of the Stoic consciousness. What
counted for the latter was merely the form of thought as such


322


C. (BB.) SPIRIT

which, besides, has any alien content taken from the actual
world. What counts, however, for the consciousness we are deal¬
ing with is not the form of thought. This, too, is essentially distinct
from the in-itself of the virtuous consciousness for which essence,
though it stands in a relationship to the actual world and is
the essence of the actual world itself, yet is initially a non-actual
essence. In the consciousness under discussion essence, although
lying beyond the actual world, none the less counts as an actual
essence. In the same way, what is intrinsically right and good
in the sphere of legislative Reason, and the universal that is
adopted by consciousness in testing laws, these also do not pos¬
sess the character of actuality. Therefore, while pure thought
fell within the world of culture itself as an aspect of the aliena¬
tion, viz. as the standard for judging Good and Bad in the
abstract, through having passed through the process of the
whole, it has become enriched with the moment of actuality
and thereby with content. But this actuality of the essence is
at the same time only an actuality of pure , not of actual , con¬
sciousness; although it is raised into the element of thought it
does not yet count as a thought for this actual consciousness;
rather it lies for the latter beyond its own actuality, for it is
the flight from this actuality.

528. Religion for it is obviously religion that we are speak¬
ing about in the form in which it appears here as the faith
elonging to the world of culture, does not yet appear as it is
in and for itself. We have already seen it in other characteristic
orms, viz. as the Unhappy Consciousness, as a shape of the
insubstantial process of consciousness itself. It made its appear¬
ance, too, in the ethical Substance as faith in the underworld,

1 ° U /k consc i° usness of the departed spirit is, strictly speaking,
not Jaith, not essence posited in the element of pure conscious¬
ness beyond the actual world, but has itself an immediate pre¬
sence; its element is the family. Here, however, religion in part
as proceeded from the Substance and is the pure consciousness
o it, m part, this pure consciousness is alienated from its actual
consciousness the essence from its existence. True, it is thus no
onger the insubstantial process of consciousness, but it still has
the characteristic of an antithesis to actuality as this actuality
in general, and of an antithesis to self-consciousness in particu¬
lar. It is therefore essentially merely a belief.


CULTURE


323


529. This pure consciousness of absolute Being is an alienated
consciousness. We have now to look more closely at the specific
nature of that of which it is the ‘other’, and we must consider
it only in connection with this ‘other’. To begin with, this pure
consciousness seems to have over against it only the world of
actuality; but since it is the flight from this world and therefore
has the character of an antithesis to it, it bears this world within
itself; pure consciousness is therefore in its own self alienated
from itself, and faith constitutes only one aspect of it. At the
same time, the other aspect has already come to view. Pure con¬
sciousness, namely, is reflection out of the world of culture in
such a way that the Substance of that world, and also the
‘masses’ or groups into which it is articulated, are shown to be
what they are in themselves, spiritual essentialities, absolutely
restless processes or determinations which are directly cancelled
in their opposite. Their essence, simple consciousness, is thus
the simplicity of absolute difference which is at once no difference.
Consequently, it is pure being-jor-selj\ not as this single self but
as the immanently universal self in the form of a restless process
which attacks and pervades the passive essence of the ‘matter
in hand’. In it is thus to be found the certainty that at once
knows itself to be the truth, pure thought as the absolute Notion
in the might of its negativity , which eliminates everything objec¬
tive that supposedly stands over against consciousness, and
makes it into a being which has its origin in consciousness. This
pure consciousness is at the same time equally simple , just
because its difference is no difference. But as this form of simple
reflection-into-self, it is the element of faith in which Spirit
has the determinateness of positive universality , of being-in-itself
in contrast to that being-for-self of self-consciousness. Forced
back into itself out of the essenceless, merely dissolving world,
Spirit, in accordance with its truth, is in an undivided unity,
at once the absolute movement and negativity of its process of mani¬
festation, as well as its inwardly satisfied essence and its positive
repose . But coming generally under the determinateness of
alienation , these two moments fall apart into a dual conscious¬
ness. The former is pure insight as the spiritual process which
focuses itself in self- -consciousness, a process which is confronted
by consciousness of what is positive, the form of objectivity or
of picture-thinking, and which turns against it; but pure


324


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


insight’s own object is only the pure e I\ The simple consciousness
of the positive, or of tranquil self-identity, on the other hand,
has for its object the inner essence qua essence. Pure insight has,
therefore, in the first instance, no content of its own, because
it is negative being-for-self; to faith, on the other hand, there
belongs a content, but without insight. If the former does not
step outside self-consciousness, the latter certainly has its con¬
tent in the element of pure self-consciousness, but in thought ,
not in Notions , in pure consciousness , not in pure self-consciousness.
Hence faith is certainly pure consciousness of essence, i.e. of the
simple inner being , and thus is thought—the cardinal factor in
the nature of faith, which is usually overlooked. The immediacy
of the presence of essence in it is due to the fact that its object
is essence , i.e. pure thought. This immediacy , however, so far as
thought enters into consciousness , or pure consciousness enters into
self-consciousness, acquires the significance of an objective being
which lies beyond the consciousness of the self. It is through
this significance which the immediacy and simplicity of pure
thought obtains in consciousness , that the essence of faith is no
longer a [pure] thought, but is reduced to the level of something
imagined, and becomes a supersensible world which is essenti¬
ally an ‘ other 3 in relation to self-consciousness. In pure insight,
on the other hand, the transition of pure thought into conscious¬
ness has the opposite determination; objectivity has the signifi¬
cance of a merely negative content, a content which is reduced
to a moment and returns into the self; that is to say, only the
self is really the object of the self, or the object only has truth so
far as it has the form of the self.

530. Just as faith and pure insight belong in common to the
element of pure consciousness, so also are they in common the
return from the actual world of culture. Consequently, they
present themselves according to three aspects. First, each is an
intrinsic being on its own account , apart from all relationships;
second, each stands in relationship with the actual world in an
antithesis to pure consciousness; and third, each is related
within pure consciousness to the other.

53 I n the consciousness of the believer , the aspect of being
in and/or itself is its absolute object whose content and determi¬
nation we already know. For according to the Notion of faith
it is nothing else but the actual world raised into the universality


CULTURE


3 2 5


of pure consciousness. The articulation of this world, therefore,
constitutes the organization of the world of faith, except that
in the latter the parts do not alienate themselves in their spiri¬
tualization, but are Beings, each with an existence of its own,
Spirits which have returned into themselves and abide with
themselves. The movement of their transition [into one
another] is therefore only for us an alienation of the specific
character in which they exist in their distinctiveness, and is only
for us a necessary series; for faith, however, their difference is a
tranquil diversity and their movement a [real] happening.

532. To name them briefly according to the external deter¬
mination of their form: just as in the world of culture state
power, or the Good, was primary, so here, too, the first is the
Absolute Being , Spirit that is in and for itself in so far as it is
the simple eternal substance. But in the actualization of its
Notion, in being Spirit, it passes over into being for-another, its
self-identity becomes an actual , sel {-sacrificing absolute Being; it
becomes a self, but a mortal, perishable self. Consequently, the
third moment is the return of this alienated self and of the
humiliated substance into their original simplicity; only in this
way is substance represented as Spirit.

533. These distinct Beings, when brought back to themselves
by thought, out of the flux of the actual world, are immutable
eternal Spirits, whose being lies in thinking the unity which they
constitute. Removed thus from self-consciousness, these Beings
are nevertheless actively present in it; for if the absolute Being
were to remain unmoved in the form of the first simple sub¬
stance, it would remain alien to self-consciousness. But the
externalization of this substance, and then its Spirit, involves
the moment of actuality and thereby makes itself a participant
in the self-consciousness of the believer, or the believing con¬
sciousness belongs to the actual world.

534. According to this second relationship, the believing
consciousness partly has its actuality in the real world of culture,
and constitutes the Spirit and the existence of that world which
we have already considered; partly, however, the believing
consciousness confronts this its own actuality as something
worthless, and is the process of overcoming it. This process does
not consist in the believing consciousness making brilliant
remarks about the perversion of its real world; for it is the simple


326 C. (BB.) SPIRIT

naive consciousness which reckons such brilliance as vanity,
since it still has the real world for its purpose. On the contrary,
contrasted with the tranquil realm of its thought, the real world
is a soulless existence, which therefore has to be overcome in
an external manner. This obedience of service and praise, by
setting aside sense-knowledge and action, produces the con¬
sciousness of unity with the absolute Being, though not as a
unity that is actually perceived; on the contrary, this service
is only the perpetual process of producing that unity, a process
which does not completely attain its goal in the present. The
[religious] community, it is true, does so, for it is universal self-
consciousness; but for the individual self-consciousness, the
realm of pure thought necessarily remains a beyond of its actual
world, or since this beyond, through the externalization of the
eternal Being, has entered the actual world, the actuality is an
uncomprehended, sensuous actuality. But one sensuous actu¬
ality remains indifferent to the other, and the beyond has only
received the further character of remoteness in space and time.
The Notion, however, the actuality of Spirit present to itself,
remains in the consciousness of the believer the inner being , which
is everything and which acts, but does not itself come forth.

535. In pure Insight , however, the Notion is alone the actual;
and this third aspect of Faith, that of being an object for pure
Insight, is really the true relation in which Faith here appears.
Pure Insight itself, like Faith, is to be considered partly in and
for itself, and partly in its relationship to the actual world so
far as this is still present in a positive form, viz. as a vain con¬
sciousness, and lastly, in that relation to faith mentioned above.

536. We have seen what pure insight is in and for itself. As
faith is the tranquil pure consciousness of Spirit as essence , so is
pure insight the ^//'-consciousness of Spirit as essence; it there¬
fore knows essence, not as essence , but as absolute self. It there¬
fore seeks to abolish every kind of independence other than that
of self-consciousness, whether it be the independence of what
is actual, or of what possesses intrinsic being, and to give it the
form of Notion. Pure insight is not only the certainty of self-con¬
scious Reason that it is all truth: it knows that it is.

537. However, in the form in which the Notion of pure in¬
sight first makes its appearance, it is not yet realized. Accord¬
ingly, its consciousness still appears as contingent , as single and


CULTURE


327

separate , and its essence appears for it in the form of an end
which it has to realize. It has, to begin with, the intention of mak¬
ing pure insight universal , i.e. of making everything that is actual
into a Notion, and into one and the same Notion in every self-
consciousness. The intention is pure , for it has pure insight for
its content; and this insight is likewise pure , for its content is
solely the absolute Notion, which meets with no opposition in
an object, nor is it restricted in its own self. In the unrestricted
Notion there are directly found the two aspects: that everything
objective has only the significance of being-for-self\ of self-con¬
sciousness, and that this has the significance of a universal , that
pure insight is to become the property of every self-conscious¬
ness. This second aspect of the intention is a result of culture
in so far as in this culture, the difference of objective Spirit,
the parts and the determinations which its judgement imposed
on the world, as well as the differences which appear as natural
predispositions, have all been upset. Genius, talent, special
capacities generally, belong to the world of actuality, in so far
as this world still contains the aspect of being a spiritual animal
kingdom in which individuals, amid confusion and mutual vio¬
lence, cheat and struggle over the essence of the actual world.
These differences, it is true, have no place in this world as honest
especes ; individuality neither is contented with the unreal ‘mat¬
ter in hand’ itself nor has it a particular content and ends
of its own. On the contrary, it counts merely as something uni¬
versally acknowledged, viz. as an educated individuality; and
the difference is reduced to one of less or more energy, a quantita¬
tive difference, i.e. a non-essential difference. This last dif¬
ference, however, has been effaced by the fact that in the com¬
pletely disrupted state of consciousness difference changed
round into an absolutely qualitative difference. There, what
is for the ‘I’ an ‘other’ is only the ‘T itself. In this infinite judge¬
ment all one-sidedness and peculiarity of the original being-
for-self has been eradicated; the self knows itself qua pure self
to be its own object; and this absolute identity of the two sides
is the element of pure insight. Pure insight is, therefore, the
simple, immanently differentiated essence , and equally the uni¬
versal work or achievement and a universal possession. In this
simple spiritual substance, self-consciousness gives itself and pre¬
serves for itself in every object the consciousness of this its own


32 8 C. (BB.) SPIRIT

particular being or of its own action, just as conversely, the
individuality of self-consciousness is therein self-identical and
universal. This pure insight is thus the Spirit that calls to every
consciousness: be for yourselves what you all are in yourselves
reasonable.
