II. THE ENLIGHTENMENT

538. The peculiar object against which pure insight directs
the power of the Notion is faith, which is the form of pure con¬
sciousness confronting it in the same element. But it also has
a relation to the actual world for, like faith, it is the return
from the actual world into pure consciousness. We have, first
of all, to see the nature of its activity as it is directed against
the impure intentions and perverse insights of the actual world.

539- We have already mentioned the tranquil consciousness
that stands opposed to this turmoil which, having once settled
down starts up all over again; it constitutes the side of pure
insight and intention. This tranquil consciousness, however, as
we saw, has no special insight into the world of culture; this latter
has itself rather the most painful feeling and the truest insight
about itself: the feeling that all its defences have broken down,
that every part of its being has been tortured on the rack and
every bone broken; it is also the language of this feeling and
the brilliant talk which pronounces judgement on every aspect
of its condition. Here, therefore, pure insight can have no
activity and content of its own and thus can only behave as
the formal and faithful apprehension of its own brilliant insight
into the world and of its own peculiar language. Since this lan¬
guage is that of a distracted mind, and the pronouncement only
some twaddle uttered on the spur of the.moment, which is again
quickly forgotten, and exists as a whole only for a third con¬
sciousness, this latter can only be distinguished as pure insight
if it brings these scattered traits into a general picture and then
makes them into an insight for everyone.

540. By this simple means it will clear up the confusion of
this world. For we have found that it is not the groups [Massen]
and the specific Notions and individualities that are the essence
of this actuality, but that this has its substance and support
solely in the Spirit which exists qua judging and discussing, and


CULTURE


329

that the interest of having a content for this argumentation and
chatter alone preserves the whole and the groups into which
it is articulated. In this language of insight, its self-conscious¬
ness is for it still a being existing on its own account , this single indivi¬
dual ; but the vanity of the content is at the same time the vanity
of the self that knows itself to be vain. When the placidly
apprehending consciousness makes a collection of the most tell¬
ing and penetrating versions of all this brilliant talk, the soul
that still preserves the whole, then the vanity of witty judge¬
ments perishes with that other vanity, the vanity of existence.
The collection shows to most people a better wit, or to everyone
at least a more varied wit, than their own, and shows that
‘knowing better’ and ‘judging’ are in general something uni¬
versal and now universally known. With this, the sole remain¬
ing interest is eradicated, and the individual judgement is
resolved into the universal insight. However, the knowledge of
essence is still firmly established as superior to empty know¬
ledge, and pure insight only manifests its own peculiar activity
in so far as it opposes itself to faith.

a. The struggle of the Enlightenment with Superstition

541. The various modes of the negative attitude of conscious¬
ness, the attitude of scepticism and that of theoretical and
practical idealism, are inferior shapes compared with that of
pure insight and its diffusion, of the Enlightenment ; for pure insight
is born of the substance [of Spirit], knows the pure self of con¬
sciousness to be absolute, and enters into dispute with the pure
consciousness of the absolute essence of all reality. Since faith
and insight are the same pure consciousness, but as regards form
are opposed—the essence is for faith [mere] thought , not Notion ,
and is therefore the sheer opposite of ^//'-consciousness, whereas
for pure insight the essence is the self— their nature is such that
each is for the other the sheer negative of it. In their appearance
as mutually opposed, all content falls to faith, for each moment,
in its tranquil element of thought, obtains an enduring being.
Pure insight, however, is in the first instance devoid of content
and is rather the pure vanishing of it; but by the negative move¬
ment towards what is negative to it, it will realize itself and
give itself a content.

542. It knows that faith is opposed to pure insight, opposed


33 o C. (BB.) SPIRIT

to Reason and truth. Just as it sees faith in general to be a tissue
of superstitions, prejudices, and errors, so it further sees the con¬
sciousness of this content organized into a realm of error in
which false insight, common to the mass of people, is immediate,
naive, and unreflective; but also it has within it the moment
of reflection-into-self, or of self-consciousness, separated from
its naivety, in the shape of an insight which remains indepen¬
dently in the background, and an evil intention by which the
general mass of the people is befooled. The masses are the vic¬
tims of the deception of a priesthood which, in its envious conceit,
holds itself to be the sole possessor of insight and pursues its
other selfish ends as well. At the same time it conspires with
despotism which, as the synthetic, non-notional unity of the real
and this ideal realm—a curiously inconsistent entity stands
above the bad insight of the multitude and the bad intentions
of the priests, and yet unites both within itself. From the stu¬
pidity and confusion of the people brought about by the trickery
of priestcraft, despotism, which despises both, draws for itself
the advantage of undisturbed domination and the fulfilment
of its desires and caprices, but is itself at the same time this same
dullness of insight, the same superstition and error.

543. The Enlightenment does not attack these three aspects
of the enemy without making a distinction. For since its essence
is pure insight, what is universal in and for itself, its true relation
to the other extreme is that in which it concerns itself with the
common and identical element in both. The aspect of individuality ,
isolating itself from the general naive consciousness, is its anti¬
thesis which it cannot directly affect. The will of the deceiving
priesthood and of the oppressive despot is, therefore, not
directly the object of its activity; its object is the insight devoid
of will which has no separable individuality of its own, the
Notion of rational self-consciousness which has its existence in
the general mass but is not yet present there qua Notion. Pure
insight, however, in delivering this honest insight and its essenti¬
ally naive nature from prejudices and errors, wrests from the
hands of the bad intention the reality and power of its deceit,
for whose realm the naive consciousness of the general mass of
the people provides its basis and material—i.e. the being-for-
self [of that realm] has its substance in the simple , naive conscious¬
ness as such.


CULTURE


33 »

544. The relation of pure insight to the naive consciousness
of absolute Being now has a twofold aspect. On the one hand,
pure insight is itself the same as that consciousness. On the other
hand, this naive consciousness gives complete liberty to absolute
Being, as well as to its parts, in the simple element of its thought,
and allows them to subsist there and to be valid only as its
implicit being , and hence to be objectively valid; but in this
implicit being it renounces its own beingfor-self\ In so far as,
according to the first aspect, this faith is for pure insight in itself
pure ^//'-consciousness and has only to become this explicitly
f or itself^ pure insight has, in this Notion of self-consciousness,
the element in which, instead of false insight, it realizes itself.

545. Since from this aspect both are essentially the same and
the relation of pure insight takes place through and in the same
element, the communication between them is direct and their
giving and receiving is an unimpeded flow of each into the
other. Whatever wedges of any sort may be driven into con¬
sciousness, it is in itself this simplicity in which everything is dis¬
solved, forgotten, and unbiased, and which therefore is abso¬
lutely receptive to the Notion. It is on this account that the
communication of pure insight is comparable to a silent expan¬
sion or to the diffusion , say, of a perfume in the unresisting atmo¬
sphere. It is a penetrating infection which does not make itself
noticeable beforehand as something opposed to the indifferent
element into which it insinuates itself, and therefore cannot be
warded off. Only when the infection has become widespread
is that consciousness, which unheedingly yielded to its influ¬
ence, aware of it. For though the nature of what consciousness
received into itself was simple and homogeneous with it, yet
it was also the simplicity of an introreflected negativity which
subsequently also develops, in keeping with its nature, into
something opposed to it and thereby reminds consciousness of
its previous state. This simplicity is the Notion, which is the
simple knowing that knows itself and also its opposite, but
knows this opposite to be reduced to a moment within it. Con¬
sequently, when consciousness does become aware of pure in¬
sight, the latter is already widespread; the struggle against it
betrays the fact that infection has occurred. The struggle is too
late, and every remedy adopted only aggravates the disease,
for it has laid hold of the marrow of spiritual life, viz. the Notion


33 2 C. (BB.) SPIRIT

of consciousness, or the pure essence itself of consciousness.
Therefore, too, there is no power in consciousness which could
overcome the disease. Because this is present in the essence itself,
its manifestations, while still isolated, can be suppressed and
the superficial symptoms smothered. This is greatly to its ad¬
vantage, for it does not now squander its power or show itself
unworthy of its real nature, which is the case when it breaks
out in symptoms and single eruptions antagonistic to the con¬
tent of faith and to its connection with the reality of the world
outside of it. Rather, being now an invisible and imperceptible
Spirit, it infiltrates the noble parts through and through and
soon has taken complete possession of all the vitals and members
of the unconscious idol; then ‘one fine morning it gives its com¬
rade a shove with the elbow, and bang! crash! the idol lies on
the floor’. 1 On ‘one fine morning’ whose noon is bloodless if
the infection has penetrated to every organ of spiritual life.
Memory alone then still preserves the dead form of the Spirit s
previous shape as a vanished history, vanished one knows not
how. And the new serpent of wisdom raised on high for adora¬
tion has in this way painlessly cast merely a withered skin.

546. But this silent, ceaseless weaving of the Spirit in the
simple inwardness of its substance, Spirit concealing its action
from itself, is only one side of the realization of pure insight.
Its diffusion consists not merely in the fact that like goes
together with like, nor is its actualization merely an expansion
in which there is no antithesis. On the contrary, the action of
the negative essence is no less essentially a developed, self-dif-
ferenting movement which, being a conscious act, must give
its moments a definite manifest existence and must appear on
the scene as a sheer uproar and a violent struggle with its anti¬
thesis.

547. We have therefore to see how pure insight and intention
behaves in its negative attitude to that ‘other’ which it finds con¬
fronting it. Pure insight and intention which takes up a negative
attitude can only be—since its Notion is all essentiality and
there is nothing outside of it—the negative of itself. As insight,
therefore, it becomes the negative of pure insight, becomes un¬
truth and unreason, and, as intention, it becomes the negative
of pure intention, becomes a lie and insincerity of purpose.

1 Diderot’s Nephew of Rameau.


CULTURE


333


548. It entangles itself in this contradiction through engag¬
ing in dispute, and imagines that what it is attacking is some¬
thing other than itself. It only imagines this, for its essence as
absolute negativity implies that it contains that otherness
within itself. The absolute Notion is the category; in that
Notion, knowing and the object known are the same. Con¬
sequently, what pure insight pronounces to be its other, what
it asserts to be an error or a lie, can be nothing else but its own
self; it can condemn only what it is itself. What is not rational
has no truth , or, what is not grasped conceptually, is not. When,
therefore, Reason speaks of something other than itself, it speaks
in fact only of itself; so doing, it does not go outside of itself.
This struggle with its antithesis, therefore, also has the signifi¬
cance of being the actualization of insight. For this consists pre¬
cisely in the process of developing the moments and taking them
back into itself. One part of this process is the differentiation
in which intellectual insight confronts its own self as object ; so
long as it persists in this relationship it is alienated from itself.
As pure insight it is devoid of all content] the process of its realiza¬
tion consists in its making itself its content; for nothing else can
become its content because it is the self-consciousness of the
category. But since in confronting the content, pure insight at
first knows it only as a content and not yet as its own self, it does
not recognize itself in it. Complete insight is therefore attained
when the content, which to begin with was objective to it, is
recognized as its own. Its result, however, will thus be neither
the re-establishment of the errors it struggles against, nor
merely its original Notion, but an insight which recognizes the
absolute negation of itself to be its own actual existence, to be
its own self, or an insight whose Notion recognizes its own self.
This nature of the struggle of the Enlightenment with errors,
that of fighting itself in them, and of condemning in them what
it itself asserts, is explicitybr us , or what Enlightenment and its
struggle is in itself It is the first aspect of this struggle, however,
the defilement of Enlightenment through the adoption by its
self-identical purity of a negative attitude, that is an object for
faith, which therefore comes to know it as falsehood, unreason,
and as ill-intentioned, just as Enlightenment regards faith as
error and prejudice. As regards its content, it is in the first in¬
stance an empty insight whose content appears to it to be some-


334


C. (BB.) SPIRIT

thing other than itself; consequently, it finds it given in the shape
of a content which is not yet its own, as something that exists
quite independently of it, finds it given in faith.

549. The way, therefore, in which Enlightenment appre¬
hends its object in the first instance and generally, is that it takes
it as pure insight , and, not recognizing itself therein, declares it
to be error. In insight as such, consciousness apprehends an
object in such a way that it becomes the essence of conscious¬
ness, or becomes an object which consciousness permeates, in
which consciousness preserves itself, abides with itself, and
remains present to itself, and since it is thus the movement of
the object, brings it into existence. It is just this that Enlighten¬
ment rightly declares faith to be, when it says that what is
for faith the absolute Being, is a Being of its own consciousness,
is its own thought, something that is a creation of consciousness
itself. Thus what Enlightenment declares to be an error and
a fiction is the very same thing as Enlightenment itself is.
Enlightenment that wants to teach faith the new wisdom does
not tell it anything new; for its object is also for it just this,
viz. a pure essence of its own consciousness, so that this con¬
sciousness does not take itself to be lost and negated in that
object, but rather puts its trust in it, i.e. it finds itself as this
particular consciousness, or as ^//'-consciousness, precisely in the
object. Whomsoever I trust, his certainty of himself is for me the
certainty of myself ; I recognize in him my own being-for-self,
know that he acknowledges it and that it is for him purpose
and essence. Trust, however, is faith, because the consciousness
of the believer is directly related to its object and is thus also in¬
tuitively aware that it is one with it and in it. Further, since
what is object for me is that in which I recognize myself, I am
for myself at the same time in that object in the form of another
self-consciousness, i.e. one which has become in that object
alienated from its particular individuality, Viz. from its natural
and contingent existence, but which partly remains therein self-
consciousness, partly, in that object, is an essential consciousness
just as pure insight is. The Notion of pure insight implies not
merely that consciousness recognizes itself in the object of its
insight and is immediately present in it without first leaving the
element of thought and returning into itself; it also implies that
consciousness is aware of itself as being also the mediating move-


CULTURE


335


ment, aware of itself as being the activity of producing the
object. This unity of itself as unity of self and object is thereby
explicit for it in thought. Faith, too, is just this consciousness.
Obedience and action form a necessary moment, through
which the certainty that absolute Being is comes about. This
action of faith does not indeed make it appear as if absolute
Being itself is produced by it. But the absolute Being of faith
is essentially not the abstract essence that would exist beyond
the consciousness of the believer; on the contrary, it is the Spirit
of the [religious] community, the unity of the abstract essence
and self-consciousness. That it be the Spirit of the community,
this requires as a necessary moment the action of the com¬
munity. It is this Spirit, only by being produced by consciousness;
or rather, it does not exist as the Spirit of the community without
having been produced by consciousness. For essential as is the
producing of it, this is equally essentially not the sole ground
of absolute Being, but only a moment. Absolute Being is at the
same time in and for itself.

550. On the other side, the Notion of pure insight is some¬
thing other to itself than its own object; for it is just this negative
determination that constitutes the object. Thus, from the other
side, it also declares the essence of faith to be something alien
to consciousness, to be not its essence but a changeling foisted
on it. But here Enlightenment is foolish; faith regards it as not
knowing what it is saying, and as not understanding the real
facts when it talks about priestly deception and deluding the
people. It talks about this as if by some hocus-pocus of conjuring
priests consciousness had been palmed off with something abso¬
lutely alien and 'other 3 to it in place of its own essence; and at
the same time it says that this is an essence of consciousness,
that consciousness believes in it, puts its trust in it, and seeks to
make it favourably disposed towards itself, i.e. consciousness
beholds in it its pure essence just as much as its own single and
universal individuality, and through this action produces this
unity of itself with its essence. Thus what it asserts to be alien
to consciousness, it directly declares to be the inmost nature of
consciousness itself. How then can it possibly talk about deception
and delusion? Since, in the same voice, it asserts the very oppo¬
site of what it maintains regarding faith, it really reveals itself
to faith as the conscious lie. How are delusion and deception


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


336

to take place where consciousness in its truth has directly the
certainty of itself where in its object it possesses its own self since
it just as much finds as produces itself in it? The distinction
no longer exists even in words. If the general question has been
propounded, whether it is permissible to delude a people, 1 the
answer would in fact have to be that the question is pointless,
because it is impossible to deceive a people in this matter. Brass
instead of gold, counterfeit instead of genuine money, may well
be passed off in isolated cases; many may be persuaded to
believe that a battle lost was a battle won, and other lies about
things of sense and isolated happenings may be made credible
for a time; but in the knowledge of that essential being in which
consciousness has the immediate certainty of itself the idea of
delusion is quite out of the question.

551. Let us see further how faith experiences the Enlighten¬
ment in the different moments of its own consciousness, to
which the view mentioned above referred to only generally.
These moments are: pure thought or, as object, absolute Being
in and for itself; then its relation—as a knowing—to absolute
Being, the ground of its belief ; and lastly, its relation to absolute
Being in its acts, or its worship and service. Just as pure insight
has failed to recognize itself and has denied itself in belief gener¬
ally, so too in these moments it will behave in an equally per¬
verse manner.

55 2 - Pure insight adopts a negative attitude to the absolute
Being of the believing consciousness. This Being is pure thought ,
and pure thought posited within itself as an object or as essence ;
in the believing consciousness, this intrinsic being of thought
acquires at the same time for consciousness that is for itself , the
form but only the empty form—of objectivity; it has the
character of something presented to consciousness. To pure in¬
sight, however, since it is pure consciousness from the side of
the self that is for itself the ‘other’ appears as something negative
of self consciousness . This could still be taken either as the pure
intrinsic being of thqught, or also as the being of sense-certainty. But
since it is at the same time for the self ’ and this self, qua self
that has an object, is an actual consciousness, the object proper
as such is for pure insight an ordinary Thing of sense-certainty
that merely is. This its object is manifest to it in the picture-thought

‘The subject of a prize essay proposed by Frederick the Great in 1778.


CULTURE


337


of faith. It condemns this picture-thought, and in it its own
object. But in apprehending the object of faith as insight’s own
object, it already does faith a wrong. For it is saying that the
absolute Being of faith is a piece of stone, a block of wood, which
has eyes and sees not, or again, a piece of dough which, having
come from the field is transformed by man and returned to
earth again; or in whatever other ways faith anthropomor¬
phizes absolute Being, making it into an object that it can
represent to itself.

553. Enlightenment, which professes to be pure, here con¬
verts what is for Spirit eternal life and Holy Spirit into an
actual .perishable thing , and defiles it with sense-certainty’s view
of it, a viewpoint which is essentially trivial and definitely
absent from faith in its worship, so that Enlightenment is com¬
pletely in the wrong when it imputes this view to faith. What
faith reveres, it certainly does not regard as stone or wood or
dough, nor any other kind of temporal, sensuous thing. If
Enlightenment has a mind to say that, all the same, its object
is also this, or even that it is essentially and in truth this, then
firstly, faith is equally well aware of that ‘ also’ which, however,
lies outside of its worship; secondly, however, faith does not
regard such things as stones, etc. as possessing intrinsic being;
on the contrary, what has intrinsic being for faith is solely the
essential being of pure thought.

554. The second moment is the relation of faith to this abso¬
lute Being as a consciousness that knows it. For faith, as a think¬
ing, pure consciousness, this Being is immediately present; but
pure consciousness is just as much a mediated relation of certainty
to truth, a relation which constitutes the ground of faith. For
Enlightenment, this ground becomes equally a fortuitous know -
ledge of fortuitous events. But the ground of knowledge is the con -
scious universal, and in its truth is absolute Spirit which, in
abstract pure consciousness, or in thought as such, is merely
absolute Being, but, qua self-consciousness, is knowledge of itself.
Pure insight characterizes this conscious universal, the simple ,
self-knowing Spirit , equally as a negative of self-consciousness. It
is true that pure insight is itself pure mediated , i.e. self-mediated
thought, is a pure knowing; but since it is a pure insight , a pure
knowing , that does not as yet know itself, i.e. is not aware that
it is this pure, mediating movement, the mediation seems to


338


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


insight, as does everything that is itself insight, to be an ‘other’.
In its realization, therefore, it develops this moment which is
essential to it; but this moment seems to it to belong to faith
and to have the character of something external to pure insight,
to be a fortuitous knowledge of narratives of real events, real
in the ordinary sense of the word. Here, therefore, it falsely
charges religious belief with basing its certainty on some particu¬
lar historical evidences which, considered as historical evidences,
would certainly not guarantee the degree of certainty about
their content which is given by newspaper accounts of any
happening—further, that its certainty rests on the accidental
preservation of these evidences; on the one hand, the preservation
by means of paper, and on the other hand, by the skill and
honesty of their transference from one piece of paper to another,
and lastly, on the correct interpretation of the meaning of dead
words and letters. In fact, however, it does not occur to faith
to fasten its certainty to such evidences and such fortuitous cir¬
cumstances. Faith, in its certainty, is an unsophisticated rela¬
tionship to its absolute object, a pure knowing of it which does
not mix up letters, paper, and copyists in its consciousness of
absolute Being, and does not bring itself into relation with it
by means of things of that kind. On the contrary, this conscious¬
ness is the self-mediating ground of its knowledge; it is Spirit
itself which bears witness to itself, both in the inwardness of the
individual consciousness and through the universal presence in
everyone of faith in it. If faith wants to appeal to historical
evidences in order to get that kind of foundation, or at least
confirmation, of its content that Enlightenment talks about,
and seriously thinks and acts as if that were a matter of im¬
portance, then it has already let itself be corrupted by the
Enlightenment; and its efforts to establish and consolidate
itself in such a way are merely evidence it gives of its corrup¬
tion by the Enlightenment.

555 - There still remains the third side, the relation to absolute
Being of consciousness as action. This action is the setting-aside of
the particularity of the individual, or of the natural mode of
its being-for-self, whence proceeds its certainty of being pure
self-consciousness, of being, in accordance with its action, i.e.
as an independent individual, one with absolute Being. Since, in
action, purposiveness and Enda.re distinguished, and pure insight


CULTURE


339


in relation to this action equally adopts a negative attitude and,
as in the other moments, denies its own self, it must, as regards
purposiveness , exhibit itself as lacking in intelligence, since insight
united with intention, i.e. the harmony of End and Means,
appears to it as an ‘other 5 , or rather as the opposite of insight;
as regards the End itself, however, it has to make badness,
enjoyment, and possession its End and so prove itself to be the
impurest kind of intention, since pure intention, qua ‘other 5 , is
equally impure intention.

556. Accordingly, we see that as regards purposiveness ,
Enlightenment finds it foolish when the believer gives himself
the superior consciousness of not being in bondage to natural
enjoyment and pleasure by actually denying himself natural
enjoyment and pleasure, and demonstrating by his actions that his
contempt for them is no lie but is genuine. Similarly, Enlighten¬
ment finds it foolish that the individual absolves itself of its
quality of being absolutely individual, excluding all others and
of possessing property of its own, by itself giving up its property;
for thereby it shows in truth that it is not in earnest with this
isolation of itself, but is raised above the natural necessity of
isolating itself, and in this absolute isolation of being-for-self
denying that others are the same as itself. Pure insight finds both
to be of no purpose as well as wrong: the purpose of showing
oneself to be free of pleasure and possession is not served by
denying oneself pleasure and giving away a possession; in the
opposite case, therefore, it will declare the man a fool who, in
order to eat, has recourse to actually eating. Insight also finds
it wrong to deny oneself a meal and to give away butter and
e gg s > not for money, nor money for butter and eggs, but simply
to give them away without receiving anything in return; it de¬
clares a meal or the possession of things of that sort to be an
End in itself, and hence in fact declares itself to be a very impure
intention, which treats such enjoyment and possession as some¬
thing wholly essential. Again, it also affirms as a pure intention
the necessity of rising above natural existence, above acquisi¬
tiveness about the means of existence; only it finds it foolish
and wrong that this elevation should be demonstrated by deeds ,
in other words, this pure insight is in truth a deception, which
feigns and demands an inner elevation, but declares that it is
superfluous, foolish, and even wrong to be in earnest about it,


340


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


to put this elevation into actual practice and demonstrate its truth.
Pure insight thus denies itself both as pure insight—for it denies
directly purposive action—and as pure intention—for it denies
the intention of proving itself freed from the Ends of a separate
individual existence.

557. It is thus that Enlightenment lets itself be understood
by faith. It presents itself in this bad light because, just by being
in relation to an ‘other’, it gives itself a negative reality , or exhibits
itselfas the opposite of itself; but pure insight and intention must
enter into this relationship, for it is their realization. This at
first appeared as a negative reality. Perhaps its positive reality
is better constituted. Let us see how things stand with this. If
all prejudice and superstition have been banished, the question
arises, What next ? What is the truth Enlightenment has propagated
in their stead? It has already declared that this positive content
is in its extirpation of error, for that alienation of itself is just
as much its positive reality. In its approach to what, for faith,
is absolute Spirit, it interprets any determinateness it discovers there
as wood, stone, etc., as particular, real things. Since in this way
it grasps in general every determinateness , i.e. all content and
filling, as somt\h\ngfinite, as a human entity and [mere] idea , abso¬
lute Being becomes for it a vacuum to which no determinations,
no predicates, can be attributed. The attribution of predicates
to such a vacuum would be in itself reprehensible; and it is just
m such a union that the monstrosities of superstition have been
produced. Reason, pure insight , is certainly not empty itself, since
the negative ofitself is for it, and is its content; on the contrary,
it is rich, but rich only in particularity and limitations. To let
nothing of that sort appertain to absolute Being or be attributed

1S the P r udent behaviour of Reason, of pure insight,
which knows how to put itself and its finite riches in their proper
p ace, and how to deal with the Absolute in a worthy manner.

558. In contrast to this empty Being there stands, as the
second moment of the positive truth of Enlightenment, the
singleness in general of consciousness and of all being, a singleness
excluded from absolute ^Being and in the form of absolute being-
in an -for-itself Consciousness, which in its very first reality is
sense-certainty and mere ‘meaning’, returns here to this from
t e whole course of its experience and is again a knowledge of
w at is purely negative of itself or of things of sense , i.e. of things


CULTURE


34*

which immediately and indifferently confront its being-for-self
Here, however, it is not an immediate , natural consciousness; on
the contrary, it has become such for itself. Whereas at first it was
at the mercy of every sort of entanglement into which it was
plunged by its unfolding, and now has been led back by pure
insight to its first shape, it has experienced that shape as result .
Being based on the nothingness of all the other shapes of con¬
sciousness, and hence of everything beyond sense-certainty, this
sense-certainty is no longer mere ‘meaning’, but rather absolute
truth. This nothingness of everything that lies beyond sense-
certainty is no doubt merely a negative proof of this truth; but
it is not susceptible of any other. For the positive truth of sense-
certainty is in its own self the immediate being-for-self of the
Notion itself qua object, and that too in the form of otherness—
the positive truth that every consciousness is absolutely certain
that it is , and that there are other real things outside of it, and
that in its natural being it, like these things, is in and for itself
or absolute.

559. Lastly, the third moment of the truth of Enlightenment is
the relation of the individual being to absolute Being, is the
relation between the first two moments. Insight, qua pure in¬
sight of what is identical or unrestricted , also goes beyond what is
not identical, viz. beyond finite reality, or beyond itself as mere
otherness. For the beyond of this otherness it has the void to
which, therefore, it relates the sensuous reality. In the determi¬
nation of this relation , both of the sides do not enter as content;
for one of them is the void, and it is only through the other,
the sensuous reality, that a content is present. But th z form of
the relation, to the determination of which the side of the in-
itself contributes, can be a matter of choice; for the form is some¬
thing intrinsically negative , and therefore self-opposed: being as
well as nothing, the in-self as well as its opposite; or, what is the
same thing, the relation of the actual world to the in-itself qua
a beyond , is as much a negating as a positing of that actual world.
Finite reality can therefore, properly speaking, be taken just
as one needs. The sensuous is therefore now related positively
to the Absolute as to the in-itself , and sensuous reality is itself
an intrinsic being; the Absolute makes it, fosters and cherishes
it. Then, again, it is related to the Absolute as an opposite, as
to its own non-being; in this relationship it is not anything in


34 2 C. (BB.) SPIRIT

itself, but exists only for an ‘other’. Whereas in the preceding
shape of consciousness, the Notions of the antithesis were deter¬
mined as Good and Bad, in the case of pure insight, on the other
hand, they become the purer abstractions of being-in-itself and
being for- another.

560. Both ways of viewing the positive and the negative rela¬
tions of the finite to the in-itself are, however, in fact equally
necessary, and everything is thus as much something in itself
as it is for an ‘other* \ in other words, everything is useful. Every¬
thing is at the mercy of everything else, now lets itself be used
by others and is for them , and now, so to speak, stands again
on its hind legs, is stand-offish towards the other, is for itself,
and uses the other in its turn. From this, we see what is the
essence and what is the place of man regarded as a Thing that
is conscious of this relation. As he immediately is, as a natural
consciousness per se , man is good , as an individual he is absolute
and all else exists for him; and moreover, since the moments
have for him, qua self-conscious animal, the significance of uni¬
versality, everything exists for his pleasure and delight and, as
one who has come from the hand of God, he walks the earth
as in a garden planted for him. He must also have plucked the
fruit of the tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil. He possesses
in this an advantage which distinguishes him from all other
creatures, for it happens that his intrinsically good nature is
also so constituted that an excess of pleasure does it harm, or
rather his individuality has also its beyond within it, can go
beyond itself and destroy itself. To counter this, Reason is for
him a useful instrument for keeping this excess within bounds,
or rather for preserving himself when he oversteps his limit; for
this is the power of consciousness. Enjoyment on the part of
the conscious, intrinsically universal being, must not itself be
something determinate as regards variety and duration, but
universal. ‘Measure’ or proportion has therefore the function
of preventing pleasure in its variety and duration from being
cut short; i.e. the function of‘measure’ is immoderation. Just
as everything is useful to man, so man is useful too, and his
vocation is to make himself a member of the group, of use for
the common good and serviceable to all. The extent to which
he looks after his own interests must also be matched by the
extent to which he serves others, and so far as he serves others,


CULTURE


343

so far is he taking care of himself: one hand washes the other.
But wherever he finds himself, there he is in his right place;
he makes use of others and is himself made use of.

561. Different things are useful to one another in different
ways; but all things are mutually serviceable through their own
nature, viz. through being related to the Absolute in two ways,
the one positive, whereby they exist entirely on their own
account, the other negative, whereby they exist for others. The
relation to absolute Being, or religion, is therefore of all useful
things the supremely useful; for it is pure utility itself, it is this
enduring being of all things, or their being-in-and-for-themselves ,
and it is their downfall, or their being-for-another.

562. To faith, of course, this positive outcome of Enlighten¬
ment is as much an abomination as its negative attitude to¬
wards belief. This [enlightened] insight into absolute Being
which sees nothing in it but just absolute Being, the litre supreme ,
or the void—this intention to regard everything in its immediate
existence as having intrinsic being or as good, and finally, to
regard the relation of the individual conscious being to absolute
Being, religion , as exhaustively expressed in the Notion of
utility all this is for faith utterly detestable. This wisdom , pecu¬
liar to Enlightenment, at the same time necessarily seems to
faith to be undiluted platitude , and the confession of platitude;
because it consists of knowing nothing of absolute Being or,
what amounts to the same thing, in knowing this quite flat tru¬
ism about it, just that it is only absolute Being; and, on the other
hand, in knowing only what is finite and, moreover, knowing
it as truth, and thinking that this knowledge of the finite as true
is the highest knowledge attainable.

563* Faith has the divine right, the right of absolute self-
identity or of pure thought, as against Enlightenment, and
receives at its hands nothing but wrong; for Enlightenment dis¬
torts all the moments of faith, changing them into something
different from what they are in it. But Enlightenment has only
a human right as against faith and for the support of its
own truth ; for the wrong it commits is the right to be non-identi¬
cal, and consists in perverting and altering, a right which
belongs to the nature of self-consciousness as against simple essen¬
tial being or thought. But since the right of Enlightenment is the
right of self-consciousness, it will not only also retain its own


344 C. (BB.) SPIRIT

right, so that two equal rights of Spirit could be left confronting
each other, neither being capable of satisfying the other: it will
maintain its absolute right because self-consciousness is the
negativity of the Notion, a negativity which is active not only
on its own account, but which also takes within its grasp its
opposite. And because faith itself is a consciousness it will not
be able to deny Enlightenment its right.

564. For Enlightenment does not employ principles peculiar
to itself in its attack on faith, but principles which are implicit
in faith itself. Enlightenment merely presents faith with its own
thoughts which faith unconsciously lets fall apart, but which
Enlightenment brings together; it merely reminds faith when
one of its own modes is present to it, of the others which it also
has, but which it always forgets when the other one is present.
Enlightenment shows itself to faith to be pure insight by the
fact that, in a specific moment, it sees the whole, brings for¬
ward the other moment which is opposed to it, and, converting
one into the other, brings to notice the negative essence of both
thoughts, the Notion. To faith, it seems to be a perversion and
a lie because it points out the otherness of its moments; in doing
so, it seems directly to make something else out of them than
they are in their separateness; but this ‘other’ is equally essential
and, in truth, is present in the believing consciousness itself, only
this does not think about it, but puts it away somewhere. Con¬
sequently, it is neither alien to faith, nor can faith disavow it.

565. Enlightenment itself, however, which reminds faith of
the opposite aspect of its separated moments, is just as little en¬
lightened about itself. It has a purely negative attitude to faith
so far as it excludes its own content from its purity and takes
that content to be the negative of itself. It therefore neither recog¬
nizes itself in this negative, in the content of faith, nor for this
reason does it bring the two thoughts together, the one which
it puts forward itself, and the one to which it opposes the first.
Since it does not recognize that what it condemns in faith is
directly its own thought, it is itself in the antithesis of the two
moments, only one ofwhich—viz. in every case the one opposed
to faith—it acknowledges, but separates the other from the first,
just as faith does. Consequently, Enlightenment does not pro¬
duce the unity of both as their unity, i.e. the Notion; but the
Notion comes into being for it of its own accord, in other words.


CULTURE


345


Enlightenment^^ the Notion there merely as something given.
For, in itself, the realization of pure insight is just this, that in¬
sight, whose essence is the Notion, at first becomes for itself an
absolute ‘other’ and repudiates itself—for the antithesis of the
Notion is an absolute antithesis—and then out of this otherness
it comes to itself, or to its Notion. But Enlightenment is only
this movement, it is the still unconscious activity of the pure
Notion, an activity which, though it does arrive at its object,
takes it to be an other , and, too, does not know the nature of the
Notion, viz. that it is the undifferentiated which absolutely
sunders itself. As against faith, then, insight is the might of the
Notion in so far as it is the movement and the relating of the
moments lying asunder in its consciousness, a relating in which
their contradiction comes to light. Herein lies the absolute right
of the authority which insight exercises over faith; but the reality
on which it exercises this authority lies just in the fact that the
believing consciousness is itself the Notion, and therefore itself
acknowledges the opposite [aspect] which insight puts before
it. Insight therefore retains its right as against faith because it
makes valid in faith what is necessary to faith itself and what
faith possesses in itself.

566. At first, Enlightenment affirms this moment of the
Notion, that it is an act of consciousness ; opposing faith, it main¬
tains that the absolute Being of faith is a Being of the believer’s
own consciousness qua a self, or that this absolute Being is a
product of consciousness. To faith, its absolute Being, while it
is possessed of intrinsic being for the believer, is also at the same
time not like an alien thing which is just found in him, no one
knowing how and whence it came. On the contrary, the faith
of the believer consists just in his finding himself as this particular
personal consciousness in the absolute Being, and his obedience
and service consist in producing, through his own activity , that
Being as his own absolute Being. Enlightenment, strictly speak¬
ing, only reminds faith of this, if faith roundly asserts that the
in-itself of absolute Being is beyond the activity of consciousness.
But while Enlightenment, it is true, corrects the one-sidedness
of faith by bringing to its notice the opposite moment of action
in contrast to being —and it is being which faith is alone thinking
of here—and yet does not itself bring its own thoughts together,
it isolates the pure moment of action and asserts that the in-itself


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


346

of faith is only a product of consciousness. This action, taken in
isolation and opposed to the in-itself\ is, however, a contingent
action and, qua an activity of picture-thinking, is a creating of
fictions—picture-thoughts which possess no intrinsic being; and
this is how Enlightenment regards the content of faith. But,
conversely, pure insight equally says the reverse. In maintain¬
ing the moment of otherness which the Notion has within it, it
pronounces [absolute] Being to be for faith something which
in no way concerns consciousness, lies beyond it, is alien to it
and unknown. The case is similar with faith. On the one hand,
it puts its trust in absolute Being, and in doing so obtains the
certainty of itself; on the other hand, for faith, absolute Being
is unsearchable in all its ways and in its Being unattainable.

567. Further, Enlightenment maintains against the believer
a right which the latter himself concedes, when Enlightenment
regards the object of the believer’s veneration as stone and
wood, or else as something finite and anthropomorphic. For
since this consciousness is divided within itself, having a beyond
of the real world and a world that is altogether this side of the
world beyond , there is, as a matter of fact, also present in it this
view of the thing ofsense according to which it counts as a being
that is in and for itself; but faith does not bring together these
two thoughts of absolute Being, which is for it at one time pure
essence and at another time an ordinary thing of sense. Even its
pure consciousness is affected by the latter view; for the dif¬
ferences of the supersensible world, because this is without the
Notion, are a series of independent shapes and their movement
is a happening , i.e. they exist only in picture-thinking and have
within them the marks of sensuous existence. Enlightenment,
on its side, equally isolates the actual world as an entity for¬
saken by Spirit, isolates determinate'ness as unmoved fini-
tude, as if it were not even a moment in the spiritual movement
of essential being, not nothing, but also not something that
absolutely is, but something that is evanescent.

568. It is clear that the same is the case with the ground of
knowledge. Faith itself acknowledges a contingent knowledge;
for it has a relationship to contingent things, and absolute Being
itself exists for faith in the form of a pictorial representation
of a common reality. Consequently, the believing conscious¬
ness, too, is a certainty which does not possess the truth within


CULTURE


347


itself, and it confesses itself to be such an unessential conscious¬
ness, to be of this world and separated from the Spirit that is
certain of itself and self-authenticated. But it forgets this
moment in its immediate spiritual knowledge of absolute Being.
Enlightenment, however, which reminds it of this, in its turn
thinks only of contingent being and forgets the other—thinks
only of the mediation which takes place through an alien third
term, not of the mediation in which the immediate is itself the
third term through which it mediates itself with the other, viz.
with its own self.

569. Finally, Enlightenment in its view of the action of faith
finds the rejection of enjoyment and possessions wrong and pur¬
poseless. As to the rejection being wrong, Enlightenment is in
agreement with faith on this point; for faith itself acknowledges
this reality of possessing, holding on to, and enjoying, property.
In holding on to property its behaviour is all the more self-
centred and stubborn, and in its enjoyment it is all the more
crudely self-abandoned, since its religious act of giving up posses¬
sions and enjoyment falls on the far side of this reality and pur¬
chases freedom for itself on that side. This service of sacrifice
of natural impulses and enjoyments has, in fact, owing to this
antithesis, no truth. Retention occurs along with sacrifice; the
latter is merely a symbol which performs real sacrifice on only
a small portion, and is therefore in point of fact only a sacrifice
in imagination.

570. As regards purposiveness , Enlightenment finds it inept to
throw away one possession in order to know and to prove that
one is liberated from all possessions, to deny oneself one
enjoyment in order to know and to prove that one is liberated
from all enjoyment. Faith itself apprehends the absolute action
as a universal action; not only is the action of its absolute Being
as its object a universal action for faith, but the individual con¬
sciousness, too, has to show that it is liberated entirely and
generally from its sensual nature. But throwing away a single
possession, or renouncing a single enjoyment, is not this uni¬
versal action; and since in the action the purpose, which is a
universal purpose, and the performance, which is a single per¬
formance, would be bound to present themselves to conscious¬
ness as essentially incompatible, that action shows itself to be
one in which consciousness has no part, and thus this kind of


348


C. (BB.) SPIRIT

action is $een to be really too naive to be an action at all. It
is too naive to fast, in order to prove that one is liberated from
the pleasures of the table; too naive to rid the body of another
pleasure, as Origen did, in order to show that that pleasure is
finished and done with. The action itself proves to be an external
and single operation; but desire is rooted inwardly and is a uni¬
versal. Its pleasure disappears neither with the instrument nor
by abstention from particular pleasures.

571. But Enlightenment on its side here isolates the inward ,
the unreal , as opposed to reality, just as it held fast to the exter¬
nality of the Thing as opposed to the inwardness of faith in the
latter’s contemplation and devotion. It places the essential fac¬
tor in the intention , in the thought , and thereby saves itself the
trouble of actually accomplishing the liberation from natural
aims. On the contrary, this inwardness is itself the formal ele¬
ment which has its filling in the natural impulses, which are
justified simply by the fact that they are inward, that they
belong to universal being , to Nature.

572. Enlightenment, then, holds an irresistible authority
over faith because, in the believer’s own consciousness, are
found the very moments which Enlightenment has established
as valid. Examining the effect of this authority more closely,
its behaviour towards faith seems to rend asunder the beautiful
unity of trust and immediate certainty , to pollute its spiritual con¬
sciousness with mean thoughts of sensuous reality, to destroy the
soul which is composed and secure in its submission, by the vanity
of the Understanding and of self-will and self-fulfilment. But
as a matter of fact, the result of the Enlightenment is rather
to do away with the thoughtless , or rather non-notional , separation
which is present in faith. The believing consciousness weighs
and measures by a twofold standard; it has two sorts of
eyes, two sorts of ears, speaks with two voices, has duplicated
all ideas without comparing the twofold meanings. In other
words, faith lives in two sorts of non -notional perceptions, the
one the perceptions of the slumbering consciousness which lives
purely in non-notional thoughts, the other those of the waking
consciousness which lives solely in the world of sense; and in
each of them it has its own separate housekeeping. The
enlightenment illuminates that heavenly world with ideas
belonging to the world ofsense, and points out this finitude which


CULTURE


349


faith cannot deny, because it is self-consciousness and hence is
the unity to which both kinds of ideas belong and in which they
do not fall apart; for they belong to the same indivisible unitary
self into which faith has passed.

573. As a result, faith has lost the content which filled its
element, and collapses into a state in which it moves listlessly
to and fro within itself. It has been expelled from its kingdom;
or, this kingdom has been ransacked, since the waking con¬
sciousness has monopolized every distinction and expansion of
it and has vindicated earth’s ownership of every portion of
it and given them back to earth. Yet faith is not on that account
satisfied, for this illumination has everywhere brought to light
only single, separate entities, so that what speaks to Spirit is
only a reality without any substance, and a finitude forsaken
by Spirit. Since faith is without any content and it cannot
remain in this void, or since, in going beyond the finite which
is the sole content, it finds only the void, it is a sheer yearnings
its truth an empty beyond, for which a fitting content can no
longer be found, for everything is bestowed elsewhere. Faith
has, in fact, become the same as Enlightenment, viz. the con¬
sciousness of the relation of what is in itself finite to an Absolute
without predicates, an Absolute unknown and unknowable;
but there is this difference, the latter is satisfied Enlightenment,
but faith is unsatisfied Enlightenment. However, we shall see
whether Enlightenment can remain satisfied; that yearning of
the troubled Spirit which mourns over the loss of its spiritual
world lurks in the background. Enlightenment itself bears
within it this blemish of an unsatisfied yearning: as pure object ,
in its empty absolute Being; as action and movement , in going beyond
its individual self to an empty and unfulfilled beyond; as an
object with a content , in the lack of selfhood in the thing that is
‘useful’. Enlightenment will rid itself of this blemish; a closer
examination of the positive result which is its truth will show
that in that result the blemish is in principle already removed.

b. The truth of Enlightenment

574. The listless movement of Spirit which no longer creates
a distinction within itself has thus entered into its own self
beyond consciousness, which, on the other hand, sees itself
clearly. The first moment of this clarity is determined in its


350


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


necessity and condition by the fact that pure insight, or insight
that is implicitly Notion, actualizes itself; it does so when it posits
otherness or determinateness within itself. In this way it is
negative pure insight, i.e. a negation of the Notion; this
negation is equally pure; and thus there has come into being
the pure Thing , the absolute Being, that has no further
determination whatever. Characterized more precisely, pure
insight, qua absolute Notion, is a distinguishing of differences
which are no longer differences, of abstractions or pure Notions
which are no longer self-supporting, but are supported and
distinguished only by the movement as a whole. This distinguishing
of what contains no difference consists simply in the fact that
the absolute Notion makes itself into its object and posits itself
as the essence over against that movement. This results in the
essence being without that side wherein abstractions or
differences are held apart , and therefore becomes pure thought in
the form of a pure Thing. This, then, is just the listless,
unconscious movement to and fro within itself of Spirit to which
faith was reduced when it lost a content that contained a
difference; it is at the same time that movement of pure self-
consciousness for which the essence is supposed to be the
absolutely alien beyond. For because this pure self-
consciousness moves about in pure Notions, in differences that
are not differences, it collapses in fact into the unconscious
movement to and fro of Spirit, i.e. into pure feeling , or pure
thinghood. The self-alienated Notion—for the Notion here is still
standing at the stage of this alienation—does not, however,
recognize this identical essence of the two sides—the movement
of self-consciousness and of its absolute Being—does not
recognize their identical essence which is, in fact, their substance
and enduring being. Since the Notion is unconscious of this
unity, absolute Being has value for it only in the form of a
beyond standing over against it, while the consciousness making
these distinctions and in this way having the in-itself outside
of it, is held to be a finite consciousness.

575. In regard to that absolute Being, Enlightenment is
caught up in the same internal conflict that it formerly
experienced in connection with faith, and it divides itself into
two parties. One party proves itself to be victorious by breaking
up into two parties; for in so doing, it shows that it contains


CULTURE


35 1


within itself the principle it is attacking, and thus has rid itself
of the one-sidedness in which it previously appeared. The inter¬
est which was divided between itself and the other party now
falls entirely within itself, and the other party is forgotten,
because that interest finds within itself the antithesis which
occupies its attention. At the same time, however, it has been
raised into the higher victorious element in which it exhibits
itself in a clarified form. So that the schism that arises in one
of the parties and seems to be a misfortune, demonstrates rather
that party’s good fortune.

576. The pure essence itself has no difference in it; con¬
sequently, the way in which it does obtain a difference is that
two such pure essences exhibit themselves for consciousness, or
there is a twofold consciousness of the essence. Pure absolute
Being is only in pure thought, or rather it is pure thought itself,
and therefore utterly beyond the finite, beyond self- consciousness,
and is only Being in a negative sense. But in this way, it is just
[mere] being , the negative of self-consciousness. As the negative
of self-consciousness it is also related to it; it is an external being
which, related to self-consciousness within which differences
and determination fall, receives within it the differences of
being tasted, seen, etc.; and the relationship is that of ^^-cer¬
tainty and perception.

577. If we start from this sensuous being into which that nega¬
tive beyond necessarily passes, but abstract from these specific
ways in which consciousness is related to it, then what remains
is pure matter as a listless, aimless movement to and fro within
itself. In this connection, it is important to bear in mind that
pure matter is merely what is left over when we abstract from seeing,
feeling, tasting, etc., i.e. it is not matter th&t is seen, tasted, felt,
etc.; what is seen, felt, tasted, is not matter , but colour, a stone*
a salt, etc. Matter is rather a pure abstraction ; and so what we
are presented with here is the pure essence of thought, or pure
thought itself as the Absolute, which contains no differences,
is indeterminate and devoid of predicates.

578. One party of the Enlightenment calls absolute Being
that predicateless Absolute which exists in thought beyond the
actual consciousness which formed the starting-point; the
other calls it matter. If these were to be distinguished as Nature
and Spirit, or God , then the unconscious and aimless inner


352


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


movement to and fro would lack the wealth of developed life
which would make it Nature, and the self-differentiated con¬
sciousness which would make it Spirit or God. The two, as we
saw, are absolutely the same Notion; the difference lies not in
what they actually are, but simply and solely in the different
starting-points of the two developments, and in the fact that
each sticks to its own point in the movement of thought. If they
could disregard their own starting-points they would meet and
would recognize that what to the one is, so it pretends, an
abomination, and to the other, a folly, is the same thing. For
to the one, absolute Being is in its pure thinking, or is imme¬
diately for pure consciousness, is outside finite consciousness,
the negative beyond of it. If it would reflect, firstly, that the
simple immediacy of thought is nothing else but pure being , and
secondly, that what is negative for consciousness is at the same
time related to it, that in the negative judgement the ‘is 3
(copula) holds together as well as separates the terms, it would
come to see that this beyond, characterized as something exist¬
ing externally , stands in a relation to consciousness and is thus
the same as what is called pure matter : the missing moment of
presence would be gained. The other Enlightenment starts from
sensuous being, then abstracts from the sensuous relation of tast-
ing, seeing, etc., and makes that being into a pure in-itself, into
an absolute matter , into what is neither felt nor tasted. This being
has in this way become something simple without predicates,
the essence of pure consciousness ; it is the pure Notion as implicitly
existent, or pure thought within itself. This insight does not con¬
sciously take the reverse step from what is, what simply is, to what
is thought, which is the same as what simply is, does not take
the step from the pure positive to the pure negative; although,
after all, the positive is pure solely through negation, while the
pure negative, as pure, is in its own self self-identical and just
for that reason positive. Or again, they have not arrived at the
Notion found in Descartes’s metaphysics, that being and
thought are, in themselves , the same; they have not arrived at
the thought that being, pure being, is not something concretely
real but a pure abstraction , and conversely, pure thought, self-
identity or essence, partly is the negative of self-consciousness and
therefore being , partly, as immediately simple, is likewise noth¬
ing else but being; thought is thinghood , or thinghood is thought.


CULTURE


353


579. Essence, here, is split into two in such a way that, to
begin with, two different ways of considering it are involved.
In part, essence must contain difference within itself; in part,
just because of this, the two ways of considering it merge into
one; for the abstract moments of pure being and the negative,
by which they are distinguished, are then united in the object
so considered. The universal common to both is the abstraction
of a pure, inward oscillation, or of pure self-thinking. This
simple rotatory motion must become more complex because it
is itself only motion by distinguishing its moments. This distin¬
guishing of the moments leaves their unmoved [unity] behind
as the empty husk of pure being , which is no longer actual
thought, no longer has any life within it; for this process of dif¬
ferentiation is, qua difference, all the content. This process, how¬
ever, which places itself outside of that unity , is an alternation—
an alternation which does not return into itself, of bein g-for-an-other,
and of bein g-for-self] it is reality in the way this is an object
for the actual consciousness of pure insight—Utility.

580. Bad as Utility may look to faith or sentimentality, or
even to the abstract thought that calls itself speculation, which
clings to the in-itself yet it is in Utility that pure insight achieves
its realization and has itself for its object, an object which it now
no longer repudiates and which, too, no longer has for it the
value of the void or the pure beyond. For pure insight is, as
we saw, the existent Notion itself, or pure self-identical per¬
sonality distinguishing itself within itself in such a way that each
of the distinguished moments is itself pure Notion, i.e. is at the
same time not distinguished; pure insight is simple, pure self-
consciousness which is for itself as well as in itself in an immediate
unity. Its being-in-itself is therefore not an enduring being, but
in its difference immediately ceases to be something; such a
being, however, that is immediately without support is not an
intrinsic being, but is essentially for an other which is the power
that absorbs it. But this second moment which is opposed to
the first, to the being-in-itself equally vanishes immediately like
the first; or, as a being which is only for an other , it is rather
the vanishing itself, and there is posited the accomplished return
into itself , being-for-self This simple being-for-self, however, as
self-identity, is rather a [mere] being, or is thereby for an other.
This nature of pure insight in the unfolding of its moments,


354


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


or insight qua object , is expressed in the Useful. What is useful,
is something with an enduring being in itself, or a Thing; this
being-in-itself is at the same time only a pure moment; hence
it is absolutely for an other , but equally is for an ‘other’ merely
what it is in itself; these opposed moments have returned into
the indivisible unity of being-for-self. While the Useful does
express the Notion of pure insight, it is not pure insight as such
but insight conceived by it in the form of object ; it is merely the
restless alternation of those moments, of which one indeed is
itself the accomplished return into itself, but only as a being-
for-selj ‘ i.e. as an abstract moment appearing on one side over
against the others. The Useful itself is not a negative essence,
having in itself these moments in their antithesis and, at the
same time as undivided in one and the same respect , or as thought ,
as they are qua pure insight; the moment of being-for-self is cer¬
tainly present in the Useful, but not in such a way that it
overarches the other moments, the in-itself and the being-for-an
other , in which case it would be the self Pure insight has, there¬
fore, in the Useful its own Notion in its pure moments for object\
it is the awareness of this metaphysics , but not as yet the compre¬
hension of it; consciousness has not yet reached the unity of Being
and Notion itself. Since the Useful still has the form of an object
for pure insight, it does have a world , one which, it is true, is
no longer in and for itself, but yet a world which it distinguishes
rom itself. Only, since the antitheses have emerged at the
summit of the Notion, the next stage will see them come into
collision, and the Enlightenment will taste the fruits of its deeds.

581. Looking at the object obtained, in relation to this whole
sphere, we see that the actual world of culture was summed
up in the vanity of self-consciousness, into a being-for-self whose
content is still that confused world of culture and which is still
t e single, individual Notion, not yet the explicitly universal
Notion. But returned into itself, that Notion is pure insight —pure
consciousness as pure self or negativity, just as faith is precisely
the same as pure thought , or positivity. In that self, faith has the
moment that makes it complete; but perishing through being
thus completed, it is in pure insight that we now see the two
moments: as absolute Being, which is simply thought or the nega¬
tive, and as matter , which has positive being. This completeness
still lacks that actual world of self-consciousness which belongs


CULTURE


355


to the vain consciousness—the world out of which thought raised
itself to itself. What is thus lacking is obtained in Utility in so
far as pure insight there acquires positive objectivity; pure in¬
sight is thereby an actual consciousness satisfied within itself.
This objectivity now constitutes its world\ it has become the
truth of the entire preceding world, of the ideal, as well as of
the real, world. The first world of Spirit is the widespread realm
of its self-dispersed existence and of the self -certainty of its indivi¬
dual forms, just as Nature disperses its life into infinitely various
forms without the genus of those forms having an actual exist¬
ence. The second world contains the genus and is the realm of
intrinsic being or truth over against that certainty. The third
world, however, that of the Useful, is the truth which is equally
the certainty of itself. The realm of the truth of faith lacks the
principle of actuality , or the certainty of self as this particular
individual. But the actuality or the certainty of self as this par¬
ticular individual lacks intrinsic being. In the object of pure in¬
sight both worlds are united. The Useful is the object in so far
as self-consciousness penetrates it and has in it the certainty of its
individual self its enjoyment (its being-for-self) ; self-consciousness
sees right into the object, and this insight contains the true
essence of the object (which is to be something that is penetrated
[by consciousness], or to be for an ‘other’). This insight is thus
itself a true knowing , and self-consciousness has equally directly
the universal certainty of itself, its pure consciousness , in this rela¬
tionship in which, therefore, truth as well as presence and actu¬
ality are united. The two worlds are reconciled and heaven is
transplanted to earth below.
