III. ABSOLUTE FREEDOM AND TERROR

582. Consciousness has found its Notion in Utility. But it
is partly still an object , and partly, for that very reason, still an
End to be attained, which consciousness does not find itself to
possess immediately. Utility is still a predicate of the object,
not itself a subject or the immediate and sole actuality of the
object. It is the same thing that appeared before, when being-
for-self had not yet shown itself to be the substance of the other
moments, a demonstration which would have meant that the
Useful was directly nothing else but the self of conscious¬
ness and that this latter was thereby in possession of it. This


356


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


withdrawal from the form of objectivity of the Useful has, how¬
ever, already taken place in principle and from this inner revo¬
lution there emerges the actual revolution of the actual world,
the new shape of consciousness, absolute freedom.

583. In fact, what we have here is no more than an empty
show of objectivity separating self-consciousness from posses¬
sion. For, partly, all existence and validity of the specific
members of the organization of the actual world and the world
of faith have, in general, returned into this simple determina¬
tion as into their ground and spiritual principle; partly, how¬
ever, this simple determination no longer possesses anything of
its own, it is rather pure metaphysic, pure Notion, or a pure
knowing by self-consciousness. That is to say, of the being-in-
and-for-itself of the Useful qua object, consciousness recognizes
that its being-in-itself is essentially a being for-an-other ; being-in-
itself, as devoid of self , is in truth a passive self, or that which
is a self for another self. The object, however, exists for con¬
sciousness in this abstract form of pure being-in-itself, for con¬
sciousness is pure insight whose distinctions are in the pure form
of Notions. But the beingfor-self into which being-for-an-other
returns, i.e. the self, is not a self belonging exclusively to what
is called object and distinct from the ‘T; for consciousness, qua
pure insight, is not a single self which could be confronted by
the object as equally having a self of its own, but is pure Notion,
the gazing of the self into the self, the absolute seeing of itself
doubled; the certainty of itself is the universal Subject, and its
conscious Notion is the essence of all actuality. If, then, the Use¬
ful was merely the alternation of the moments, an alternation
which did not return into its own unity, and hence was still an
object for knowing, it now ceases to be this. For knowing is itself
the movement of those abstract moments, it is the universal self,
the self of itself as well as of the object and, as universal, is the
self-returning unity of this movement.

584. Spirit thus comes before us as absolute freedom. It is self-
consciousness which grasps the fact that its certainty of itself
is the essence of all the spiritual ‘masses’, or spheres, of the real
as well as of the supersensible world, or conversely, that essence
and actuality are consciousness’s knowledge of itself. It is con¬
scious of its pure personality and therein of all spiritual reality,
and all reality is solely spiritual; the world is for it simply its


CULTURE


357


own will, and this is a general will. And what is more, this will
is not the empty thought of will which consists in silent assent,
or assent by a representative, but a real general will, the will
of all individuals as such. For will is in itself the consciousness
of personality, or of each, and it is as this genuine actual will
that it ought to be, as the ^//'-conscious essence of each and
every personality, so that each, undivided from the whole,
always does everything, and what appears as done by the whole
is the direct and conscious deed of each.

585. This undivided Substance of absolute freedom ascends
the throne of the world without any power being able to resist
it. For since, in truth, consciousness alone is the element in
which the spiritual beings or powers have their substance, their
entire system which is organized and maintained by division
into ‘masses’ or spheres has collapsed, now that the individual
consciousness conceives the object as having no other essence
than self-consciousness itself, or as being absolutely Notion.
What made the Notion into an existent object was its diremption
into separate subsistent spheres, but when the object becomes
a Notion, there is no longer anything in it with a continuing
existence; negativity has permeated all its moments. It comes
into existence in such a way that each individual consciousness
raises itself out of its allotted sphere, no longer finds its essence
and its work in this paiticular sphere, but grasps itself as the
Notion of will, grasps all spheres as the essence of this will, and
therefore can only realize itself in a work which is a work of
the whole. In this absolute freedom, therefore, all social groups
or classes which are the spiritual spheres into which the whole
is articulated are abolished; the individual consciousness that
belonged to any such sphere, and willed and fulfilled itself in
it, has put aside its limitation ; its purpose is the general purpose,
its language universal law, its work the universal work.

586. The object and the [moment of] difference have here lost
the meaning of utility > which was the predicate of all real being;
consciousness does not begin its movement in the object as if
this were something alien from which it first had to return into
itself; on the contrary, the object is for it consciousness itself.
The antithesis, consists, therefore, solely in the difference
between the individual and the universal consciousness; but the
individual consciousness itself is directly in its own eyes that


358 C. (BB.) SPIRIT

which had only the semblance of an antithesis; it is universal con¬
sciousness and will. The beyond of this its actual existence hovers
over the corpse of the vanished independence of real being,
or the being of faith, merely as the exhalation of a stale gas,
of the vacuous &tre supreme.

587. After the various spiritual spheres and the restricted
life of the individual have been done away with, as well as his
two worlds, all that remains, therefore, is the immanent move¬
ment of universal self-consciousness as a reciprocity of self-con¬
sciousness in the form of universality and of personal conscious¬
ness: the universal will goes into itself and is a single , individual
will to which universal law and work stand opposed. But this
individual consciousness is no less directly conscious of itself as
universal will; it is aware that its object is a law given by that
will and a work accomplished by it; therefore, in passing over
into action and in creating objectivity, it is doing nothing in¬
dividual, but carrying out the laws and functions of the state.

588. This movement is thus the interaction of consciousness
with itself in which it lets nothing break loose to become a free
object standing over against it. It follows from this that it cannot
achieve anything positive, either universal works of language
or of reality, either of laws and general institutions of conscious
freedom, or of deeds and works of a freedom that wills them.
The work which conscious freedom might accomplish would con¬
sist in that freedom, qua universal substance, making itself into
an object and into an enduring being. This otherness would be the
moment of difference in it whereby it divided itself into stable
spiritual ‘masses’ or spheres and into the members of various
powers. These spheres would be partly the ‘thought-things’ of
a power that is separated into legislative, judicial, and executive
powers; but partly, they would be the real essences we found in
the real worldofculture, and, looking more closely at the content
of universal action, they would be the particular spheres of
labour which would be further distinguished as more specific
‘estates’ or classes. Universal freedom, which would have
separated itself in this way into its constituent parts and by the
very fact of doing so would have made itself into an existent Sub¬
stance, would thereby be free from particular individuality, and
would apportion the plurality of individuals to its various con¬
stituent parts. This, however, would restrict the activity and


CULTURE


359


the being of the personality to a branch of the whole, to one
kind of activity and being; when placed in the element of being,
personality would have the significance of a specific per¬
sonality; it would cease to be in truth universal self-conscious¬
ness. Neither by the mere idea of obedience to self-given laws
which would assign to it only a part of the whole, nor by its
being represented in law-making and universal action, does self-
consciousness let itself be cheated out of reality , the reality of
itself making the law and accomplishing, not a particular work,
but the universal work itself For where the self is merely repre¬
sented and is present only as an idea, there it is not actual ; where
it is represented by proxy, it is not.

589. Just as the individual self-consciousness does not find
itself in this universal work of absolute freedom qua existent Sub¬
stance, so little does it find itself in the deeds proper and individual
actions of the will of this freedom. Before the universal can per¬
form a deed it must concentrate itself into the One of individu¬
ality and put at the head an individual self-consciousness; for
the universal will is only an actual will in a self, which is a One.
But thereby all other individuals are excluded from the entirety
of this deed and have only a limited share in it, so that the deed
would not be a deed of the actual universal self-consciousness.
Universal freedom, therefore, can produce neither a positive
work nor a deed; there is left for it only negative action; it is
merely the fury of destruction.

590. But the supreme reality and the reality which stands
in the greatest antithesis to universal freedom, or rather the sole
object that will still exist for that freedom, is the freedom and
individuality of actual self-consciousness itself. For that uni¬
versality which does not let itself advance to the reality of an
organic articulation, and whose aim is to maintain itself in an
unbroken continuity, at the same time creates a distinction
within itself, because it is movement or consciousness in general.
And, moreover, by virtue of its own abstraction, it divides itself
into extremes equally abstract, into a simple, inflexible cold
universality, and into the discrete, absolute hard rigidity and
self-willed atomism of actual self-consciousness. Now that it has
completed the destruction of the actual organization of the
world, and exists now just for itself, this is its sole object, an
object that no longer has any content, possession, existence, or


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


360

outer extension, but is merely this knowledge of itself as an abso¬
lutely pure and free individual self. All that remains of the
object by which it can be laid hold of is solely its abstract exist¬
ence as such. The relation, then, of these two, since each exists
indivisibly and absolutely for itself, and thus cannot dispose of
a middle term which would link them together, is one of wholly
unmediated pure negation, a negation, moreover, of the indivi¬
dual as a being existing in the universal. The sole work and deed
of universal freedom is therefore death , a death too which has
no inner significance or filling, for what is negated is the empty
point of the absolutely free self. It is thus the coldest and
meanest of all deaths, with no more significance than cutting
off a head of cabbage or swallowing a mouthful of water.

591. In this flat, commonplace monosyllable is contained the
wisdom of the government, the abstract intelligence of the uni¬
versal will, in the fulfilling of itself. The government is itself
nothing else but the self-established focus, or the individuality,
of the universal will. The government, which wills and executes
its will from a single point, at the same time wills and executes
a specific order and action. On the one hand, it excludes all
other individuals from its act, and on the other hand, it thereby
constitutes itself a government that is a specific will, and so
standsopposed to the universal will; consequently, it is absolutely
impossible for it to exhibit itself as anything else but a faction.
What is called government is merely the victorious faction, and
in the very fact of its being a faction lies the direct necessity
of its overthrow; and its being government makes it, conversely,
into a faction, and [so] guilty. When the universal will main¬
tains that what the government has actually done is a crime
committed against it, the government, for its part, has nothing
specific and outwardly apparent by which the guilt of the will
opposed to it could be demonstrated; for what stands opposed
to it as the actual universal will is only an unreal pure will, inten¬
tion. Being suspected, therefore, takes the place, or has the signifi¬
cance and effect, of being guilty ; and the external reaction
against this reality that lies in the simple inwardness of inten¬
tion, consists in the cold, matter-of-fact annihilation of this
existent self, from which nothing else can be taken away but
its mere being.

592. In this its characteristic work , absolute freedom becomes


CULTURE


361

explicitly objective to itself, and self-consciousness learns what
absolute freedom in effect is. In itself, \ it is just this abstract self-
consciousness , which effaces all distinction and all continuance
of distinction within it. It is as such that it is objective to itself;
the terror of death is the vision of this negative nature of itself.
But absolutely free self-consciousness finds this its reality quite
different from what its own Notion of itself was, viz. that the
universal will is merely the positive essence of personality, and
that this latter knows itself in it only positively, or as preserved
therein. Here, however, this self-consciousness which, as pure
insight, completely separates its positive and its negative
nature—completely separates the predicateless Absolute as
pure Thought and as pure Matter —is confronted with the abso¬
lute transition of the one into the other as a present reality. The
universal will, qua absolutely positive , actual self-consciousness,
because it is this self-conscious reality heightened to the level
of pure thought or of abstract matter, changes round into its nega¬
tive nature and shows itself to be equally that which puts an
end to the thinking of oneself \ or to self-consciousness.

593* Absolute freedom as pure self-identity of the universal
will thus has within it negation ; but this means that it contains
difference in general, and this again it develops as an actual dif¬
ference. For pure negativity has in the self-identical universal
will the element of subsistence, or the Substance in which its
moments are realized; it has the matter which it can utilize
in accordance with its own determinateness; and in so far as
this Substance has shown itself to be the negative element for
the individual consciousness, the organization of spiritual
‘masses’ or spheres to which the plurality of individual con¬
sciousnesses are assigned thus takes shape once more. These in¬
dividuals who have felt the fear ofdeath, of their absolute master,
again submit to negation and distinctions, arrange themselves
in the various spheres, and return to an apportioned and limited
task, but thereby to their substantial reality.

594. Out of this tumult, Spirit would be thrown back to its
starting-point, to the ethical and real world of culture, which
would have been merely refreshed and rejuvenated by the fear
of the lord and master which has again entered men’s hearts.
Spirit would have to traverse anew and continually repeat this
cycle of necessity if the result were only the complete interpene-


362


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


tration of self-consciousness and Substance—an interpenetra¬
tion in which self-consciousness, which has experienced the
negative power of its universal essence acting on it, would desire
to know and find itself, not as this particular individual, but
only as a universal, and therefore, too, would be able to endure
the objective reality of universal Spirit, a reality excluding self-
consciousness qua particular. But in absolute freedom there was
no reciprocal action between a consciousness that is immersed
in the complexities of existence, or that sets itself specific aims
and thoughts, and a valid external world, whether of reality or
thought; instead, the world was absolutely in the form of con¬
sciousness as a universal will, and equally self-consciousness was
drawn together out of the whole expanse of existence or mani¬
fested aims and judgements, and concentrated into the simple
self. The culture to which it attains in interaction with that
essence is, therefore, the grandest and the last, is that of seeing
its pure, simple reality immediately vanish and pass away into
empty nothingness. In the world of culture itself it does not get
as far as to behold its negation or alienation in this form of pure
abstraction; on the contrary, its negation is filled with a con¬
tent, either honour or wealth, which it gains in place of the
self that it has alienated from itself; or the language of Spirit
and insight which the disrupted consciousness acquires; or it
is the heaven of faith, or the Utility of the Enlightenment. All
these determinations have vanished in the loss suffered by the


self in absolute freedom; its negation is the death that is without
meaning, the sheer terror of the negative that contains nothing
positive, nothing that fills it with a content. At the same time,
however, this negation in its real existence is not something
alien; it is neither the universal inaccessible necessity in which
the ethical world perishes, nor the particular accident of private
possession, nor the whim of the owner on which the disrupted


consciousness sees itself dependent; on the contrary, it is th e
universal will which in this its ultimate abstraction has nothing
positive and therefore can give nothing in return for the sacri¬
fice. But for that very reason it is immediately one with self-
consciousness, or it is the pure positive, because it is the pure
negative; and the meaningless death, the unfilled negativity of
the self, changes round in its inner Notion into absolute posit¬
ivity. For consciousness, the immediate unity of itself with the


CULTURE


363

universal will, its demand to know itself as this specific point
in the universal will, is changed round into the absolutely oppo¬
site experience. What vanishes for it in that experience is
abstract being or the immediacy of that insubstantial point, and
this vanished immediacy is the universal will itself which it now
knows itself to be in so far as it is a pure knowing or pure will.
Consequently, it knows that will to be itself, and knows itself
to be essential being; but not essential being as an immediate
existence , not will as revolutionary government or anarchy striv¬
ing to establish anarchy, nor itself as the centre of this faction
or the opposite faction; on the contrary, the universal will is its
pure knowing and willing and it is the universal will qua this pure
knowing and willing. It does not lose itself in that will, for pure
knowing and willing is much more it than is that atomic point
of consciousness. It is thus the interaction of pure knowing with
itself; pure knowing qua essential being is the universal will; but
this essential being is abolutely nothing else but pure knowing.
Self-consciousness is, therefore, the pure knowing of essential
being qua pure knowing. Further, as an individual self it is only
the form of the subject or of real action, a form which is known
by it as form. Similarly, objective reality, being, is for it simply
a selfless form; for that reality would be something that is not
known. This knowing, however, knows knowing to be essen¬
tial being.

595. Absolute freedom has thus removed the antithesis
between the universal and the individual will. The self-
alienated Spirit, driven to the extreme of its antithesis in which
pure willing and the agent of that pure willing are still distinct,
reduces the antithesis to a transparent form and therein finds
itself. Just as the realm of the real world passes over into the
realm of faith and insight, so does absolute freedom leave its
self-destroying reality and pass over into another land of self-
conscious Spirit where, in this unreal world, freedom has the
value of truth. In the thought of this truth Spirit refreshes itself,
in so far as it is and remains thought , and knows this being which
is enclosed within self-consciousness to be essential being in its
perfection and completeness. There has arisen the new shape
of Spirit, that of the moral Spirit.


364


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


SPlI


Rit t Hat is certain of itself, morality

596. Tt

the Spirit 1 e et hical world showed its fate and its truth to be
This leg a i h* ** ad merel Y P assecl awa Y in the individual self.
side of th ^ erson > however, has its Substance and fulfilment out-
faith doe at W ° r ^* The movement of the world of culture and
through e !u aWay w hh this abstraction of the person, and,
abstracti C Corn Pl ete d alienation, through the ultimate
will, andfi* 1 ’ ^ U ^ stance becomes for Spirit at first the universal
appears n , a ^ Spirit’s own possession. Here, then, knowledge
truth - aSt t0 kave become completely identical with its
between ' tTut ^ * s l ^ ls ver Y knowledge and any antithesis
or m itself K tW ° sides has vanis h ecJ j vanished not only for us
c °nscio bUt Por se ^f' consc i° usness In other words, self-

c °nscio USneSS !* as S a ined the mastery over the antithesis within
ce rtaint USneSS This antithesis rests on the antithesis of the
is fore ^ °/ se ^ and of the object. Now, however, the object
just as°th C ^° USn ^ SS * tse ^ certa i nt Y °f itself, viz. knowledge—
° Wn . e Cer tainty of itself as such no longer has ends of its
ness* b * f re ^ ore no longer [contained] within a determinate-

597 U Th PUFe knowled S e -

stance it if US ^ se ^" consc i° usness > lts knowledge is the Sub-
lutd 1 ^ Substance is for it just as immediate as it is abso-

ethic^ ^d^ed in an indivisible unity. It is immediate , like the
bou H COnsciousness which knows its duty and does it, and is
as th UP lt as w *th lts own nature 5 but it is not character ,
dia at . et ^^ ca ^ consciousness is which, on account of its imme-
0 f C /’ ls a s pecifically determined Spirit, belongs only to one
kn 6 et ^' ca ^ essentialities, and has the characteristic of not
^nowing. It is absolute mediation , like the consciousness which cul-
!vates itself, and the consciousness which believes; for it is
essentially the movement of the self to set aside the abstraction
o immediate existence , and to become conscious of itself as a uni-
versa -—and yet to do so neither by the pure alienation and
isruption of itself and of actuality, nor by fleeing from it.
ather, it is immediately present to itself in its substance, for this
is its knowledge, is the intuited pure certainty of itself; and just
this immediacy which is its own reality, is all reality, for the imme¬
diate is being, itself, and, as pure immediacy purified by absolute
negativity, it is being in general, or all being.






MORALITY


3 6 5


598. Absolute essential being is, therefore, not exhausted
when determined as the simple essence of thought ; it is all reality ,
and this reality is only as knowledge. What consciousness did
not know would have no significance for consciousness and can
have no power over it. Into its conscious will all objectivity,
the whole world, has withdrawn. It is absolutely free in that
it knows its freedom, and just this knowledge is its substance
and purpose and its sole content.

a. The moral view of the world

599. Self-consciousness knows duty to be the absolute
essence. It is bound only by duty, and this substance is its own
pure consciousness, for which duty cannot receive the form of
something alien. However, as thus locked up within itself, moral
self-consciousness is not yet posited and considered as conscious¬
ness . The object is immediate knowledge, and, being thus per¬
meated purely by the self is not an object. But because self-con¬
sciousness is essentially a mediation and negativity, its Notion
implies relation to an otherness and [thus] is consciousness. This
otherness, because duty constitutes the sole aim and object of
consciousness, is, on the one hand, a reality completely without
significance for consciousness. But because this consciousness is
so completely locked up within itself, it behaves with perfect
freedom and indifference towards this otherness; and therefore
the existence of this otherness, on the other hand, is left com¬
pletely free by self-consciousness, an existence that similarly is
related only to itself. The freer self-consciousness becomes, the
freer also is the negative object of its consciousness. The object
has thus become a complete world within itself with an indivi¬
duality of its own, a self-subsistent whole of laws peculiar to
itself, as well as an independent operation of those laws, and
a free realization of them—in general, a Nature whose laws like
its actions belong to itself as a being which is indifferent to moral
self-consciousness, just as the latter is indifferent to it.

600. From this determination is developed a moral view of
the world which consists in the relation between the absoluteness
of morality and the absoluteness of Nature. This relation is
based, on the one hand, on the complete indifference, and in¬
dependence of Nature towards moral purposes and activity,
and, on the other hand, on the consciousness of duty alone as





3 66


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


the essential fact, and of Nature as completely devoid of inde¬
pendence and essential being. The moral view of the world con¬
tains the development of the moments which are present in this
relation of such completely conflicting presuppositions.

601. To begin with, then, the moral consciousness as such
is presupposed; duty is the essence for this consciousness which
is actual and active, and in its actuality and action fulfils its
duty. But this moral consciousness is at the same time faced


with the presupposed freedom of Nature; in other words, it
learns from experience that Nature is not concerned with giving
the moral consciousness a sense of the unity of its reality with
that of Nature, and hence that Nature perhaps may let it
become happy, or perhaps may not. The non-moral conscious¬
ness, on the other hand, finds, perhaps by chance, its realization
w ere the moral consciousness sees only an occasion for acting,
utdoes not see itself obtaining, through its action, the happi'
ness o performance and the enjoyment of achievement. There-
ore, it nds rather cause for complaint about such a state of
incompati ility between itself and existence, and about the in-
J /A S // C k W 1C r restr * cts n to having its object merely as a pure
U Lj* e USCS t0 * et ** see th e object and itself realized.

1 p a J t u' e m °ral consciousness cannot forego happiness and
which i'q 1S C ernen * ou t of its absolute purpose. The purpose,
self-cnnQr* X P reSSe **P ure duty, essentially implies this individual
constitmp 10USn k SS i ln( ^ v id ua l conviction and the knowledge of it
objectified * so . ute element in morality. This element in the
ness that , r P ose ’ m fulfilled duty, is the individual conscious-
•nfoymem wS S “ ™H 2 ed; in other words, it »

indeed immediat T thUS lmplied in the Notion of morality, not
position bm nni C , ln mora ^ity regarded as sentiment or dis-
ever, me :ans ^ n . Notion of its actualization. This, how-

position for • e ^°^ rnent is also implied in morality as dis-
action, but proceedsTn n0t remain disposition in contrast to
expressed as the wh 1 ^ °J l ° realize itse,f - Thus the P ur P ose ’

is that the fulfilled H ^ W • consc i° usness of its moments,

ized individuality aS much a moral action as a real-

in contrast to the ah ^ Nature > the aspect of individuality
Necessary as is thp S faC * pur P ose > is one with this purpose-

sides, because NatureuTf 16 ” 4 * ° f the disha rmony of the two

free, even so, what is essential is duty



MORALITY


367


alone, and Nature contrasted with it is devoid of a self. That
purpose in its entirety which the harmony of the two constitutes,
contains within it actuality itself. It is at the same time the
thought of actuality. The harmony of morality and Nature or,
since Nature comes into account only in so far as consciousness
experiences its unity with it—the harmony of morality an
happiness, is thought of as something that necessarily is, i«e« it
is postulated. For to say that something is demanded , means that
something is thought of in the form of being that is not yet
actual—a necessity not of the Notion qua Notion, but 0 eing.
But necessity is at the same time essentially relation ase on
the Notion. The being that is demanded, then, is not the ima¬
gined being of a contingent consciousness, but is implied in the
Notion of morality itself, whose true content is t^ e unity 0
pure and the individual consciousness; it is for t e atter to se
[hat this unity be,/or it, an actuality: in thecontentof the purpose
this is happiness, but in its form, is existence in genera .
existence thus demanded, i.e. the unity of bot , is t ere or ^
a wish nor, regarded as purpose, one whose attain
Still uncertain; it is rather a demand of Reason, or an immedi
certainty and presupposition of Reason.

603. That first experience and this postulate are no

nostulates but a whole circle of postulates opens up. Nature
h t to "ay is not merely this wholly free,

of its own, or has its own individual

to the pure will and its pure purpose. However in «^

this opposition XCunityofthe latter with it, for

sensuousness to it, t J t and thc sens uous aspect

its essence. Both of i th< J’' consciousness, and it is

of consciousness are A ^ which thig pure unity



3 68


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


the conflict be resolved, the result being the emergence of the
unity of both, a unity which is not the former original [i.e. imme¬
diate] unity of both in a single individual, but a unity which
proceeds from the known antithesis of both. Only such a unity
is actual morality, for in it is contained the antithesis whereby
the self is consciousness, or first is an actual self in fact, and
at the same time a universal. In other words, in that unity there
is expressed that mediation which, as we see, is essential to
morality. Since, of the two moments of the antithesis, sensuous¬
ness is sheer otherness , or the negative, while, on the other hand,
the pure thought of duty is the essence, no element of which
can be given up, it seems that the resultant unity can only be
brought about by getting rid of sensuousness. But since sen¬
suousness is itself a moment of the process producing the unity,
viz. the moment of actuality, we have to be content, in the first
instance, with expressing the unity by saying that sensuousness
should be in conformity with morality. This unity is likewise a
postulated being ; it is not actually there ; for what is there is con¬
sciousness, or the antithesis of sensuousness and pure conscious¬
ness. But at the same time, the unity is not an in-itself or merely
implicit like the first postulate in which free Nature constitutes
an element of the unity, and in consequence the harmony of
Nature with the moral consciousness falls outside of the latter.
On the contrary, Nature here is that which is an element of
consciousness itself, and we have here to deal with morality as
such, with a morality that is the active self’s very own. Con¬
sciousness has, therefore, itself to bring about this harmony and
continually to be making progress in morality. But the con¬
summation of this progress has to be projected into a future
infinitely remote; for if it actually came about, this would do
away with the moral consciousness. For morality is only moral
consciousness as negative essence, for whose pure duty sensuous¬
ness has only a negative significance, is only not in conformity
with duty. But, in that harmony, morality qua consciousness, i.e.
its actuality , vanishes, just as in the moral consciousness, or in
the actuality of morality, the harmony vanishes. The consumma¬
tion, therefore, cannot be attained, but is to.be thought of
merely as an absolute task, i.e. one which simply remains a task.
Yet at the same time its content has to be thought of as some¬
thing which simply must be , and must not remain a task:


MORALITY


369


whether we imagine the [moral] consciousness to be altogether
done away with in this goal, or not. Which of these really is
the case can no longer clearly be determined in the dim remote¬
ness of infinity, to which for that very reason the attainment
of the goal is postponed. Strictly speaking, we shall have to say
that a definite idea on this point ought not to interest us, and
ought not to be looked for, because it leads to contradictions—
the contradiction of a task which is to remain a task and yet
ought to be fulfilled, and the contradiction of a morality which
is no longer to be [a moral] consciousness , i.e. not actual. How¬
ever, the idea that a perfected morality would involve a con¬
tradiction would do harm to the sanctity of the very essence
of morality, and absolute duty would appear as something un¬
real.

604. The first postulate was the harmony of morality and
objective Nature, the final purpose of the world ; the other, the
harmony of morality and the sensuous will, the final purpose
of self-consciousness as such. The first, then, is harmony in the
form of an implicit being, the other, in the form of being-for-self.
But what connects, as middle term, these postulated two
extreme final purposes is the movement of actual conduct itself.
They are harmonies whose moments, in their abstract dis¬
tinctiveness, have not yet developed into objects [for conscious¬
ness]. This occurs in the actuality in which the sides appear
in consciousness proper, each as the other of the other. The postu¬
lates arising from this now contain the harmonies both in and
for themselves, whereas previously they were postulated only
as separate, one being in itself or implicit and the other being
for itself or explicit.

605. The moral consciousness as the simple knowing and wil¬
ling of pure duty is, in the doing of it, brought into relation
with the object which stands in contrast to its simplicity, into
relation with the actuality of the complex case, and thereby
has a complex moral relationship with it. Here arise, in relation
to content, the many laws generally, and in relation to form,
the contradictory powers of the knowing consciousness and of
the non-conscious.

In the first place, as regards the many duties, the moral
consciousness in general heeds only the pure duty in them; the
many duties qua manifold are specific and therefore as such have


370


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


nothing sacred about them for the moral consciousness. At the
same time, however, being necessary , since the Notion of‘doing’
implies a complex actuality and therefore a complex moral rela¬
tion to it, these many duties must be regarded as possessing an
intrinsic being of their own. Further, since they can exist only
in a moral consciousness , they exist at the same time in another
consciousness than that for which only pure duty qua pure duty
possesses an intrinsic being of its own and is sacred.

606. Thus it is postulated that it is another consciousness
which makes them sacred, or which knows and wills them as
duties. The first holds to pure duty, indifferent to all specific
content, and duty is only this indifference towards such content.
The other, however, contains the equally essential relation to
‘doing’, and to the necessity of the specific content: since for this
other, duties mean specific duties, the content as such is equally
essential as the form which makes the content a duty. This con¬
sciousness is consequently one in which universal and particular
are simply one, and its Notion is, therefore, the same as the
Notion of the harmony of morality and happiness. For this anti¬
thesis equally expresses the separation of the self-equal moral
consciousness from that actuality which, as manifold being, con¬
flicts with the simple essential nature of duty. While, however,
the first postulate expresses the harmony of morality and
Nature, as a harmony that simply is, because in it Nature is
t is negative aspect of self-consciousness, is the moment of being,
this implicit harmony, on the other hand, is now essentially
posite as consciousness. For what simply is, now has the form
°j l e J^ ntent °f duty, or is the determinateness in the determinate
U ^’ . e lm plicit harmony is thus the unity of what are simple
sen ia ities, essentialities of thought, and are therefore only in
. 1 ° nSC1 ?y sness ' Thus is then henceforth a master and ruler of
. WOf ’ w ^° brings about the harmony of morality and
nlir/f*^i at ^ same time sanctifies duties in their multi-
nf/> ^ A 1S U aSt means this much, that for the consciousness

hp corrp^K e . eterm ^ nate or specific duty cannot straightway
‘Hnin ’ u* ecause a s P e cific duty, on account of the actual
falls ^ 1C r \ s P ec $ c act ion, is likewise necessary, its necessity
1 • , V e 0 f at con sciousness into another consciousness,
hich thus mediates or brings together the specific and the pure
u y an is t e reason why the former also has validity.


MORALITY


37i

607. In the actual ‘doing 5 , however, consciousness behaves
as this particular self, as completely individual; it is directed
towards reality as such, and has this for its purpose, for it wills
to achieve something. Duty in general thus falls outside of it
into another being, which is consciousness and the sacred law¬
giver of pure duty. For the consciousness which acts, and just
because it acts, the validity of the other consciousness, that of
pure duty, is directly acknowledged; this pure duty is thus the
content of another consciousness, and is sacred for the con¬
sciousness that acts only mediately, viz. through the agency of
this other consciousness.

608. Because it is in this way posited that the validation of
duty, as something absolutely sacred, falls outside of actual con¬
sciousness, this latter accordingly stands altogether on one side
as the imperfect moral consciousness. Just as, in regard to its know¬
ledge , it knows itself then as a consciousness whose knowledge
and conviction are imperfect and contingent; similarly, in
regard to its willing , it knows itself as a consciousness whose pur¬
poses are affected with sensuousness. On account of its un¬
worthiness, therefore, it cannot look on happiness as necessary,
but as something contingent, and can expect it only as a gift
of Grace.

609. But though its actuality is imperfect, all the same its
pure will and knowledge hold duty to be what is essential. In
the Notion, therefore, so far as the Notion is contrasted with
reality, or in thought, it is perfect. But the absolute Being is
just this being that is thought , a being that is postulated beyond
reality. It is, therefore, the thought in which morally imperfect
knowledge and willing are held to be perfect, and the absolute
Being, since it gives full weight to this imperfection, bestows
happiness according to worthiness, i.e. according to the merit
ascribed to the imperfect moral consciousness.

610. In this, the moral view of the world is completed. For
in the Notion of the moral self-consciousness the two aspects,
pure duty and actuality, are explicitly joined in a single unity,
and consequently the one, like the other, is expressly without
a being of its own, but is only a moment , or is superseded. This
becomes explicit for consciousness in the last phase of the moral
view of the world. That is to say, it places pure duty in a being
other than itself, i.e. it posits pure duty partly as something


37 2 C. (BB.) SPIRIT

existing only in thought , partly as something that is not valid
in and for itself; rather it is the non-moral [consciousness] that
is held to be perfect. Equally, it gives itself the character of a
consciousness whose actuality, not being in conformity with
duty, is superseded and, qua superseded, or in the idea of abso¬
lute Being, no longer contradicts morality.

611. For the moral consciousness itself, however, its moral
view of the world does not mean that consciousness develops
therein its own Notion, and makes this its object. It is not con¬
scious of this antithesis either as regards the form or the content;
it does not relate and compare the sides of this antithesis with
one another, but, in its development, rolls onward, without
being the Notion which holds the moments together. For it
knows only the pure essence , or the object so far as it is duty , so
far as it is an abstract object of its pure consciousness, as a pure
knowing, or as its own self. It thinks, therefore, only in abstrac¬
tions, and does not comprehend [i.e. in terms of the Notion].
Consequently, the object of its actual consciousness is not yet
transparent to it; it is not the absolute Notion, which alone
grasps otherness as such, or its absolute opposite, as its own self.
It does indeed hold its own reality, like all objective reality,
to be unessential ; but its freedom is the freedom of pure thought,
in contrast to which, therefore, Nature likewise has arisen as
an existence that is equally free. Because both are equally
present in it, i.e. the freedom of [mere] being , and the inclusion
of this being within consciousness, its object becomes one that
has being , but at the same time exists only in thought ; in the last
stage of the moral view of the world, the content is explicitly
such that its being is given to it by thought , and this conjunction
of being and thought is pronounced to be what in fact it is—
imagining.

612. When we consider the moral view of the world in such
a way that this objective mode is nothing else than the very

otion of moral self-consciousness which it makes objective to
itself, this awareness of the form of its origin gives rise to its
exposition in another shape. The first stage which forms the
starting-point is the actual moral self-consciousness, or the fact
that there is such a moral self-consciousness. For the Notion gives
it this explicit character, viz. that all reality in general has essen¬
tial being for it only so far as it is in conformity with duty; and


MORALITY


373


this essential being it characterizes as knowledge, i.e. as in im¬
mediate unity with the actual self. Hence this unity is itself
actual, it is a moral, actual consciousness. This now, qua con¬
sciousness, pictures its content to itself as an object, viz. as the
final purpose of the world, as harmony of morality and all
reality. But since it thinks of this unity as object , and is not the
Notion which has mastery over the object as such, the unity
is a negative of self-consciousness for it, or it falls outside of it,
as something beyond its actual existence, and yet at the same
time is something that also has being, but a being existing only
in thought.

613. This self-consciousness which, qua self-consciousness, is
other than the object, is thus left with the lack of harmony
between the consciousness of duty and reality, and that, too,
its own reality. Accordingly, the proposition now runs as fol¬
lows: ‘There is no moral, perfect, actual self-consciousness’; and,
since the moral sphere is at all, only in so far as it is perfect,
for duty is the pure unadulterated intrinsic being or in-itself, and
morality consists only in conformity to this pure in-itself—the
second proposition simply runs: ‘There is no moral existence
in reality.’

614. Since, however, in the third place, it is a single self, it
is in itself or implicitly the unity of duty and reality. This unity
therefore becomes an object for it as perfect morality—but as
a beyond of its reality, yet a beyond that ought to be actual.

615. In this goal of the synthetic unity of the first two pro¬
positions, the self-conscious reality [i.e. actual self-conscious¬
ness] as well as duty, is posited as only a superseded moment. For
neither of these two is single and separate; on the contrary, each
of them, whose essential determination lies in their being free
from one another, is thus in the unity no longer free from the other,
and each therefore is superseded. Hence', as regards content,
they become as such, objects each of which counts as object
for the other, and as regards form, in such a way that this inter¬
change is at the same time only imagined [i.e. occurs only in
thought ], Or, again, the actually non-moral sphere, because it is
equally pure thought, and is raised above its actual existence,
is yet, in imagination, moral, and is taken to be completely
valid. In this way, the first proposition, that there is a moral self-
consciousness, is reinstated, but is bound up with the second,


374


C. (BB.) SPIRIT

that there is none , i.e. that there is one, but only in imagination;
or, in other words, it is true that there is none, yet, all the same,
it is allowed by another consciousness to pass for one.

b. Dissemblance or duplicity

616. In the moral view of the world we see, on the one hand,
consciousness itself consciously produce its object; we see that it
neither encounters the object as something alien to it, nor does
the object come before it in an unconscious manner. On the
contrary, it proceeds in every case in accordance with a prin¬
ciple on the basis of which it posits objective being. It thus knows
this latter to be its own self, for it knows itself to be the active agent
that produces it. It seems, therefore, to attain here its peace
and satisfaction, for this can only be found where it no longer
needs to go beyond its object, because this no longer goes
beyond it. On the other hand, however, consciousness itself really
places the object outside itself as a beyond of itself. But this object
with an intrinsic being of its own is equally posited as being,
not free from self-consciousness, but as existing in the interest
of, and by means of, it.

617. The moral world-view is, therefore, in fact nothing
other than the elaboration of this fundamental contradiction
in its various aspects. It is, to employ here a Kantian expression
where it is most appropriate, a ‘whole nest’ of thoughtless con¬
tradictions. The way in which consciousness proceeds in this de¬
velopment, is to establish one moment and to pass directly from
it to another, setting aside the first; but now, as soon as it has
set up this second moment, it also sets it aside again, and really
makes the opposite moment the essential one. At the same time,
it is also aware of its contradiction and shiftiness , for it passes
from one moment, immediately in its relation to this very
moment, over to the opposite. Because a moment has no reality
for it, it posits that very same moment as real : or, what comes
to the same thing, in order to assert one moment as possessing
being in itself, it asserts the opposite as the one that possesses
being in itself. In so doing it confesses that, as a matter of fact,
it is in earnest with neither of them. We must examine more
closely the moments of this insincere shuffling.

618. Let us, to begin with, not question the assumption that
there is an actual moral consciousness, because the assumption


morality


375

is made directly and not in connection with something preced-
ing; and let us turn to the harmony of morality and Nature, the
first postulate. It is supposed to be an implicit harmony, not expli¬
citly for actual consciousness, not present; on the contrary,
what is present is rather only the contradiction of the two. In
the present, morality is assumed as already in existence , and actu¬
ality is so placed that it is not in harmony with it. The actual
moral consciousness, however, is one that acts; it is precisely
therein that the actuality of its morality consists. But in the very
doing or acting, the place [given to actuality] is displaced; for
the action is nothing other than the actualization of the inner
moral purpose, nothing other than the production of an actuality
determined by the purpose , or of the harmony of the moral purpose
and actuality itself. At the same time, the performance of the
action is a fact of which consciousness is aware, it is the presence
of this unity of actuality and purpose, and because, in the
accomplished deed, consciousness knows itself to be actualized
as this particular consciousness, or beholds existence returned
into itself—and enjoyment consists in this—there is also con¬
tained in the actuality of the moral purpose that form of actu¬
ality which is called enjoyment and happiness. Action, there¬
fore, in fact directly fulfils what was asserted could not take place,
what was supposed to be merely a postulate, merely a beyond.
Consciousness thus proclaims through its deed that it is not in
earnest in making its postulate, because the meaning of the
action is really this, to make into a present reality what was
not supposed to exist in the present. And, since the harmony
is postulated for the sake of the action—that is to say, what is to
to become actual through action, must be so in itself \ otherwise
actuality would not be possible —the connection of action and
postulate is so constituted that, for the sake of the action, i.e.
for the sake of the actual harmony of purpose and actuality, this
harmony is postulated as not actual, as a beyond.

619. Since action does take place, the lack of fitness between
purpose and reality is not taken seriously at all. On the other
hand, action itself does seem to be taken seriously. In point of
fact, however, the actual deed is only a deed of the individual
consciousness, and therefore itself only something individual,
and the result contingent. But the purpose of Reason as the uni¬
versal, all-embracing purpose, is nothing less than the whole


376


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


world; a final purpose going far beyond the content of this indivi¬
dual deed, and therefore to be placed altogether beyond any¬
thing actually done. Because the universal best ought to be
carried out, nothing good is done. I n fact, however, the nullity
of what is actually done and the reality of the whole purpose alone,
which are now postulated—these, too, are in every respect
again ‘displaced . The moral action is not something contingent
and restricted, for it has as its essence pure duty. This constitutes
the sole entire purpose ; and thus the deed, no matter in what
other way its content is limited, is, qua actualization of that pur¬
pose, the accomplishment of the entire absolute purpose. Or,
again, if reality is taken to be Nature, which has its own laws
and stands in contrast to pure duty, so that duty cannot realize
its law within Nature, then, since it is duty as such that essenti¬
ally matters, what we are in fact concerned with is not the fulfil¬
ment of pure duty, which is the whole purpose; for the fulfil¬
ment would really have as its purpose, not pure duty, but its
antithesis, reality. But there is again a shift from the position
that it is not reality with which we are concerned; for according
to the Notion of moral action, pure duty is essentially an active
consciousness. Thus there certainly ought to be action, absolute
duty ought to be expressed in the whole of Nature, and moral
law to become natural law.

620. If then we allow that it is this highest good that essenti-
ally matters, then consciousness is not in earnest with morality
at all. For in this highest good, Nature does not have a different
law from that of morality. Hence moral action itself is ruled
°ut, for action takes place only on the. assumption of a negative
which is to be set aside by the action. But if Nature is in con¬
formity with the moral law, the latter would in fact be violated
by the setting-aside of what is in existence. In the assumption
that the highest good is what essentially matters, there is
admitted a situation in which moral action is superfluous, and
does not take place at all. The postulate of the harmony of
morality and reality—a harmony posited by the Notion of
moral action, which implies bringing the two into agreement—
is expressed from this point of view, too, in the form: ‘Because
moral action is the absolute purpose, the absolute purpose is,
that there should be no such thing as moral action.’

621. When we put together these moments, which conscious-






MORALITY


377

ness has traversed in its ideas of morality, it is clear that each
one in turn is superseded in its opposite. Consciousness starts
from the idea that, for it , morality and reality do not harmonize;
but it is not in earnest about this, for in the deed the presence
of this harmony becomes explicit for it. But it is not in earnest
even about this deed, since the deed is something individual;
for it has such a high purpose, the highest good. But this again
is only a dissemblance of the facts, for such dissemblance would
do away with all action and all morality. In other words, con¬
sciousness is not, strictly speaking, in earnest with moral action:
what it really holds to be most desirable, to be the Absolute,
is that the highest good be accomplished, and that moral action
be superfluous.

622. From this result consciousness must go on still further
in its contradictory movement, and of necessity again dissemble
this suppression of moral action. Morality is the ‘in-itself’, the
merely implicit element; if it is to be actual , the final purpose
of the world cannot be fulfilled; rather the moral consciousness
must exist on its own account and find itself confronted by a
Nature opposed to it. But it must be perfected in its own self.
This leads to the second postulate of the harmony of itself and
the Nature which is immediately an element in it, i.e. the sense-
nature. Moral self-consciousness asserts that its purpose is pure,
is independent of inclinations and impulses, which implies that
it has eliminated within itself sensuous purposes. But this
alleged elimination of the element of sense it dissembles again.
It acts, brings its purpose into actual existence, and the self-
conscious sense-nature which is supposed to be eliminated is
precisely this middle term or mediating element between pure
consciousness and actual existence—it is the instrument or
organ of the former for its realization, and what is called
impulse, inclination. Moral self-consciousness is not, therefore,
in earnest with the elimination of inclinations and impulses, for
it is just these that are the self-realizing self-consciousness. But also
they ought not to be suppressed , but only to be in conformity with
Reason. And they are in conformity with Reason, for moral
action is nothing else but consciousness realizing itself, thus giv¬
ing itself the shape of an impulse , i.e. it is immediately the present
harmony of impulse and morality. But impulse is not in fact
merely this empty shape which could have within it a spring



C. (BB.) SPIRIT


378

of action other than the one it is, and be impelled by it. For
sense-nature is one which contains within itself its own laws and
springs of action; consequently, morality cannot therefore be
in earnest about being itself the mainspring of impulses, the
angle of inclination for inclinations. For since these have their
own fixed quality and peculiar content, the consciousness to
which they were to conform would be rather in conformity with
them —a conformity with which moral self-consciousness refuses
to comply. The harmony of the two is thus merely implicit ,
merely postulated.

In moral action the actually present harmony of morality and
the sense-nature was just now asserted, but now is ‘displaced’;
the harmony is beyond consciousness in a nebulous remoteness
where nothing can any more be accurately distinguished
or comprehended; for our attempt just now to comprehend
this unity failed. In this [merely] implicit harmony, however,
consciousness surrenders itself altogether. This implicit har¬
mony is its moral perfection, where the struggle of morality and
the sense-nature has ceased, and the latter is in conformity
with morality in a way that is beyond our comprehension. For
that reason this perfection is again only a dissemblance, a falsifi¬
cation of the situation, since as a matter of fact it would be
rather morality itself that was given up in that perfection,
because it is only consciousness of absolute purpose as pure pur¬
pose, one therefore opposed to all other purposes. Morality is
both the activity of this pure purpose, and also the consciousness
of rising above sense-nature, of being mixed up with sense-
nature and struggling against it. That consciousness is not in
earnest about the perfection of morality is indicated by the fact
that consciousness itself shifts it away into infinity , i.e. asserts
that the perfection is never perfected.

623. What consciousness really holds to be the truth of the
matter is only this intermediate state of imperfection, a state
nevertheless which at least is supposed to be a progress towards
perfection. But it cannot even be that; for to advance in
morality would really be to move towards its disappearance.
That is to say, the goal would be the nothingness or the aboli¬
tion, mentioned above, of morality and consciousness itself; but
to approach ever nearer to nothingness means to diminish.
Besides, ‘advancing’ as such, like ‘diminishing’, would assume


MORALITY


379

quantitative differences in morality; but there can be no question
of these in it. In morality, as in consciousness, for which the
moral purpose is pure duty, there cannot be any thought at all
of difference, least of all of the superficial one of quantity; there
is only one virtue, only one pure duty, only one morality.

624. Since, then, it is not moral perfection that is taken seri¬
ously, but rather the intermediate state, i.e. as just argued, non¬
morality, we thus return, from another aspect, to the content
of the first postulate: viz. we cannot understand how happiness
is to be demanded for this moral consciousness on the ground
of its worthiness. It is aware of its imperfection and cannot, there¬
fore, in point of fact demand happiness as a desert, as something
of which it is worthy. It can only ask for happiness to be granted
as a free act of grace, i.e. it can only ask for happiness as such ,
as something existing in and for itself, and can expect it, not
on the absolute ground mentioned above, but as coming to it
by chance and caprice. Here, then, non-morality declares just
what it is—that it is concerned not about morality, but solely
about happiness as such without reference to morality.

625. By this second aspect of the moral view of the world,
the other assertion of the first aspect, in which the disharmony
of morality and happiness is assumed, is also nullified. It is
claimed that experience shows that in this present world the
moral individual often fares badly, while the immoral indivi¬
dual often flourishes. But the intermediate state of an imperfect
morality, which has shown itself to be the essential one, clearly
shows that this observation, this supposed experience, is merely
a dissemblance of the true state of the case. For since morality
is imperfect, i.e. morality in fact is not , what can there be in
the experience that morality fares badly? Since, at the same
time, it has turned out that it is happiness simply as such that
is involved, it is evident that in making the judgement that the
immoral individual flourishes, it was not intended to imply that
an injustice occurred here. The designation of an individual
as immoral necessarily falls away when morality in general is im¬
perfect, and has therefore only an arbitrary basis. Therefore,
the sense and content of the judgement of experience is solely
this, that happiness simply as such should not have been the
lot of some individuals, i.e. the judgement is an expression of
envy which covers itself with the cloak of morality. The reason,


3 8o C. (BB.) SPIRIT

however, why so-called good luck should fall to the lot of others,
is good friendship, which grants and wishes them, and itself, too,
this lucky chance.

626. Morality, then, in the moral consciousness is imperfect;
this is now what is put forward. But it is the essence of morality
to be only the perfectly pure ; imperfect morality is therefore
impure, or is immorality. Morality itself thus exists in another
being than the actual consciousness. This other being is a holy
moral lawgiver. The imperfect morality in consciousness, which
is the reason for making these postulates, means, in the first in¬
stance, that morality, when it is posited in consciousness as actual ,
stands in relation to an ‘other’, to an existence, and therefore
itself receives within it otherness or difference, giving rise to a
whole variety of moral laws. The moral self-consciousness at
the same time, however, holds these many duties to be unessen¬
tial; for it is concerned only with the one pure duty, and the
many have no truth for it in so far as they are specific duties. They
can therefore have their truth only in another being and are
made sacred—which they are not for the moral consciousness
by a holy lawgiver. But this again is only a dissemblance 01 the
real position. For the moral self-consciousness is its own Abso¬
lute, and duty is absolutely only what it knows as duty. But duty
it knows only as pure duty; what is not sacred for it is not sacred
in itself, and what is not in itself sacred, cannot be made sacred
by the holy being. The moral consciousness, too, is not real y
in earnest about letting something be made sacred by another
consciousness than itself; for that alone it holds to be sacred which
it has itself made sacred, and is sacred in it. It is, therefore, just
as little in earnest about the holiness of this other being, for
in this something was supposed to obtain an essentiality which
for the moral consciousness, i.e. in itself, it did not possess.

627. If the holy being was postulated in order that in it duty
might have its validity, not as pure duty, but as a multiplicity
of specific duties, then this again must be dissembled, and the
other being alone must be holy in so far as only pure duty has
validity in it. Pure duty has also in point of fact validity only
in another being, not in the moral consciousness. Although in
the latter it seems that pure morality alone has validity, the
position must be put in another way, for it is at the same time
a natural consciousness. In it, morality is affected and con-


MORALITY


381


ditioned by the sense-nature, and is therefore not free and inde¬
pendent, but contingent on free will] in it, however, as pure
will s morality is contingent on knowledge. Morality, therefore,
in and for itself is in another being.

628. This other being, then, is here the purely perfect
morality, for in it morality does not stand in a relation to Nature
and sense. But the reality of pure duty is its realization in Nature
and sense. The moral consciousness attributes its imperfection
to the fact that in it morality has a positive relation to Nature
and sense, because it holds that an essential moment in morality
is that it should have a negative , and only a negative, relation
to them. The pure moral being, on the other hand, because
it is above the struggle with Nature and sense, does not stand
in a negative relation to them. Therefore, in fact, there remains
for it only the positive relation to them, i.e. just what a moment
ago was, qua imperfect, held to be immoral. But a pure morality
that was completely separated from reality, and so likewise was
without any positive relation to it, would be an unconscious,
unreal abstraction in which the concept of morality, which in¬
volves thinking of pure duty, willing, and doing it, would be
done away with. Such a purely moral being is therefore again
a dissemblance of the facts, and has to be given up.

629. In this purely moral being, however, the moments of
the contradiction, in which this synthetic presentation of them
flounders about, are brought closer together; and consciousness
lets these opposites follow one after the other, one always being
replaced by the other, without bringing its thoughts together,
so that in the end it is forced to give up its moral view of the
world and seek refuge within itself.

630. It knows its morality to be imperfect because it is
affected by the sense-nature and Nature opposed to it, which
in part adulterate morality itself as such, and in part give rise
to a host of duties by which in concrete cases of real action it
is embarrassed. For each case is the concrescence of many moral
relations, just as an object of perception in general is a thing
of many properties; and since the specific duty is a purpose, it
has a content, and its content is part of the purpose, and morality
is not pure. This latter therefore has its reality in another being.
This reality, however, means nothing else than that the being
of morality here is both intrinsic and explicit : explicit, i.e. it is


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


382

the morality of a conscious being, and intrinsic, i.e. it has an exist¬
ence and a reality. In that first, imperfect consciousness morality
is not realized. There, it is the ‘in-itself’, or merely implicit
being in the sense of a mere ‘though t-thing’; for it is associated
with Nature and sense, with the reality of being and conscious¬
ness which constitutes its content, and Nature and sense are
morally nothing. In the second consciousness morality exists as
perfect and not as an unrealized ‘thought-thing’. But this perfec¬
tion consists precisely in morality having reality in a consciousness ,
as well as a free reality, an existence in general, in being some¬
thing not empty but full-filled, full of content; i.e. the perfection
of morality is placed in the fact that what has just been charac¬
terized as morally nothing is present in it and intrinsic to it.
On one hand it is supposed to have validity simply and solely
as the unreal ‘thought-thing’ of pure abstraction, and then
again equally to have no validity in that mode; its truth is sup¬
posed to consist in its being opposed to reality, and to be entirely
free and empty of it, and then again, to consist in its being
reality.

631. The syncretism of these contradictions which is set forth
at length in the moral view of the world, collapses internally,
since the distinction on which it rests, the distinction between
what must be thought and postulated, and yet is at the same
time not essential, becomes a distinction which no longer exists
even in words. What finally is posited as diverse, both as a noth¬
ing and also as a reality, is one and the very same thing, viz.
existence and reality; and what is supposed to be absolute, only
as the beyond of real being and consciousness, and yet equally
to be absolute only in them, and so as a beyond to be nothing—
this Absolute is pure duty, and the knowledge of duty as essence.
The consciousness which makes this distinction that is no dis¬
tinction, which asserts that actual existence has no validity, and
at the same time that it is real, that pure morality is both truly
essential, and also devoid of essence—such a consciousness
expresses in one and the same breath the thoughts which it pre¬
viously separated, and itself proclaims that it is not in earnest
about this determination and separation of the moments of self
and in-itself or intrinsic being; but that on the contrary, what
it asserts as having absolute being outside of consciousness, it
really keeps enclosed within the self of self-consciousness, and


MORALITY


383

that what it asserts to have absolute being in thought , or to be
absolutely intrinsic being, it for that very reason takes to be some¬
thing that has no truth. Consciousness comes to see that the
placing-apart of these moments is a ‘ ^placing’ of them, a dis¬
semblance, and that it would be hypocrisy if, nevertheless, it were
to keep them separate. But as moral pure self-consciousness, it
flees from this disparity between the way it thinks [of these
moments] and its own essential nature, flees from this untruth
which asserts that to be true which it holds to be untrue, flees
from this with abhorrence back into itself. It is a pure conscience
which rejects with scorn such a moral idea of the world; it is
in its own self the simple Spirit that, certain of itself, acts con¬
scientiously regardless ofsuch ideas, and in this immediacy pos¬
sesses its truth. While, however, this world of dissemblance is
nothing else but the development of moral self-consciousness
in its moments, and hence is its reality , its essential nature, by
retreating into itself, will not become anything different. Its
retreat into itself means rather that consciousness has realized
that its truth is a pretended truth. It would always have to be
giving out this pretended truth as its truth, for it would have
to express and present itself as an objective idea, but would be
aware that all this is merely a dissemblance. It would therefore
be, in fact, hypocrisy, and the scornful rejection of that dis¬
semblance would be itself the first expression of hypocrisy.

c. Conscience. The { beautiful soul\ evil and its forgiveness

632. The antinomy of the moral view of the world, viz. that
there is a moral consciousness, and that there is none, or that
the validation of duty lies beyond consciousness, and con¬
versely, takes place in it—these contradications were gathered
up in the idea in which the now-moral consciousness has moral
validity, its contingent knowing and willing are assumed to
have full weight, and happiness is granted to it as an act of
grace. Moral self-consciousness did not accept responsibility for
this self-contradictory idea, but shifted it on to a being other
than itself. But this placing outside of itself what it must think
of as necessary is as much a contradiction as regards form, as
the other was as regards content. Because, however, what
appear as contradictory propositions, which the moral con¬
sciousness makes clumsy efforts first to separate and then to


384


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


reconcile, are intrinsically the same, since pure duty, viz. as pure
knowing , is nothing else than the self of consciousness, and the
self of consciousness is being and actuality : and similarly, because
what is supposed to lie beyond actual consciousness is nothing
else than pure thought, and thus is, in fact, the self—because
this is so, self-consciousness, for us or in itself retreats into itself,
and is aware that that being is its own self, in which what is
actual is at the same time pure knowing and pure duty. It is
itself in its contingency completely valid in its own sight, and
knows its immediate individuality to be pure knowing and
doing, to be the true reality and harmony.

633. This self of conscience, Spirit that is directly aware of
itself as absolute truth and being, is the third self. We have
reached it as the outcome of the third world of Spirit and we
shall briefly compare it with the two preceding selves. The
totality or actuality which shows itself to be the truth of the
ethical world is the self of the [legal] person; its existence con¬
sists in its being acknowledged by others. Just as this person
is the self that is devoid of substance, so is its existence an
abstract reality too. The person counts , and that simply as a per¬
son: the self is the point immediately at rest in the element of
its being. That point is not separated off from its universality,
and therefore the two are not actively related to one another:
the universal is in it without any distinction, and is neither the
content of the self, nor is the self filled by itself. The second
self is the world of culture which has attained its truth, or it
is Spirit that has recovered itself from its dividedness—absolute
freedom. In this self, that first, immediate unity of individuality
and universality is sundered; the universal which all the same
remains a purely spiritual entity, the state of being acknow¬
ledged or a universal willing and knowing, is object and content
of the self and its universal reality. But it does not have the form
of an existence free from the self; in this self, therefore, it obtains
no filling and no positive content, no world. Moral self-con¬
sciousness does indeed let its universality go free so that it
becomes a nature of its own, and equally it holds fast to it within
itself as a superseded moment. It is, however, merely an in¬
sincere play of alternating these two determinations. It is as con¬
science that it first has, in its self certainty , a content for the previ¬
ously empty duty, as also for the right and the universal will


MORALITY


385


that were empty of content. And because this self-assurance is
at the same time an immediacy , conscience exists.

634. Moral self-consciousness having attained its truth, it
therefore abandons, or rather supersedes, the internal division
which gave rise to the dissemblance, the division between the
in-itself and the self, between pure duty qua pure purpose, and
reality qua a Nature and sense opposed to pure purpose. It is,
when thus returned into itself, concrete moral Spirit which, in
the consciousness of pure duty, does not give itself an empty
criterion to be used against actual consciousness; on the con¬
trary, pure duty, as also the Nature opposed to it, are super¬
seded moments. Spirit is, in an immediate unity, a self-actualiz¬
ing being, and the action is immediately something concretely
moral.

635. Suppose a case of moral action; it is an objective reality
for the knowing consciousness. This, qua conscience, knows it
in an immediate, concrete manner; and at the same time it is
only as conscience knows it. Knowing is contingent in so far
as it is something other than the object; but Spirit that is self¬
certain is no longer such a contingent knower, and a producer
of thoughts divorced from reality. On the contrary, since the
separation of the in-itself and the self has been done away with,
a case of moral action is, in the sens e-certainty of knowing,
directly as it is in itself and it is in itself only in the way that
it is in this [kind of] knowing. Action qua actualization is thus
the pure form of will—the simple conversion of a reality that
merely is into a reality that results from action , the conversion
of the bare mode of objective knowing [i.e. knowing an object]
into one of knowing reality as something produced by conscious¬
ness. Just as sense-certainty is immediately taken up, or rather
converted, into the in-itself of Spirit, so this conversion, too,
is simple and unmediated, a transition effected by the pure
Notion without alteration of the content, the content being de¬
termined by the interest of the consciousness knowing it.
Further, conscience does not split up the circumstances of the
case into a variety of duties. It does not behave as a positive uni¬
versal medium , wherein the many duties would acquire, each for
itself, a fixed substantial nature. If it did, then either no action
could take place at all, because each concrete case involves an
antithesis in general, and, in a case of morality, a clash of


386


C. (BB.) SPIRIT

duties—and therefore by the very nature of action one side
would be injured, one duty violated: or else , if action did take
place, there would be an actual violation of one of the conflict¬
ing duties. Conscience is rather the negative One, or absolute
self, which does away with these various moral substances; it
is simple action in accordance with duty, which fulfills not this
or that duty, but knows and does what is concretely right. It
is, therefore, first of all moral action qua action into which the
previous moral consciousness that did not act has passed. The
concrete shape of the deed may be analysed by the conscious¬
ness looking for distinctions into various properties, i.e. here,
into various moral relations; and each of these may either be
asserted as absolutely valid (as it must be if it is supposed to
be duty), or else compared and tested. In the simple moral
action of conscience, duties are lumped together in such a way
that all these single entities are straightway demolished , and the
sifting of them in the steadfast certainty of conscience to ascer¬
tain what our duty is, simply does not take place.

636. Just as little is there present in conscience that fluctuat¬
ing uncertainty of consciousness which now places so-called
pure morality outside of itself into another, holy being and takes
itself to be unholy, but then again places so-called pure morality
within itself, and the connection of the sensuous with the moral
in that other being.

637. It renounces all these attitudes and dissemblances, con¬
nected with the moral view of the world, when it renounces

hat consciousness which thinks of duty and reality as contradic-
ory. ccor mg to this latter view, I act morally when I am
o/tfcioitf of performing only pure duty and nothing else but that;
this means, in fact, when I do not act. But when I really act,

exisff'n 011800 ^ 5 r^ an ot ^ er ’ a reality which is already in
™‘ " Ce ’ a " d -^, a rea,it y I wish to produce; I have a specific
else^hjf ^th U f s P ec ifi c d ut y in which there is something
e P ure L d “ty which alone should be intended. Con-
T hC ° ther hand ’ is rareness of the fact that, when
ra consciousness declares pure duty to be the essence of
th f ,S P^e purpose is a dissemblance of the truth of

. f er ’ r F thC f t Ct 1S that pure duty cons i sts in the empty
c ion o pure thought, and has its reality and its content
on y in a specific reality, in a reality which is the reality of con-


MORALITY


367

sciousness itself, and consciousness not as a mere ‘thought-thing’
but as an individual. As for conscience itself, this knows that
it has its truth in the immediate certainty of itself. This immediate
concrete self-certainty is the essence [of the action]; looking at
this certainty from the point of view of the antithesis of con¬
sciousness, the content of the moral action is the doer’s own
immediate individuality ; and the form of that content is just this
self as a pure movement, viz. as [the individual’s] knowing or
his own conviction.

638. Looking more closely at the unity of the moral con¬
sciousness and at the significance of its moments, we see that
it regards itself as the in-itself or essence ; but as conscience, it
apprehends its being-for-self or its self. The contradiction of the
moral consciousness resolves itself i.e. the difference which lies
at its base proves to be none, and it runs away into pure nega¬
tivity; but this precisely is the self, a simple self which is both
a pure knowing and a knowledge of itself as this individual con¬
sciousness. Consequently, this self constitutes the content of
what was previously the empty essence; for it is actual , a self
which no longer has the significance of being a nature alien
to the essence and, with laws of its own, independent of it. As
the negative, it is the difference within pure essence, a content,
and one, too, which is valid in and for itself.

639. Further, this self, qua a pure self-identical knowing, is
the absolute universal , so that just this knowing, as its own know¬
ing, as conviction, is duty. Duty is no longer the universal that
stands over against the self; on the contrary, it is known to have
no validity when thus separated. It is now the law that exists
for the sake of the self, not the self that exists for the sake of
the law. Law and duty, however, have for that reason the sig¬
nificance not only of being-for-self but also of intrinsic being ; for
this knowing, because it is self-identical, is precisely the in-itself.
In consciousness, too, this in-itself separates itself from that im¬
mediate unity with being-for-self; as thus standing over against
the latter it is being, a being-for-another. Duty itself, as duty for¬
saken by the self, is now known to be only a moment', from signify¬
ing the absolute essence, it has fallen to the level of mere being,
which is not self, is not for itself, and is therefore a being-for-
another. But the being-for-another remains an essential moment
just because the self, qua consciousness, constitutes the antithesis


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


388

ofbeing-for-selfand being-for-another; and now duty is present
in consciousness as something directly actual, is no longer merely
abstract pure consciousness.

640. This being-for-another is, therefore, the substance which
remains in itself or unexplicated, which is distinct from the self.
Conscience has not given up pure duty or the abstract in-itself \
duty is the essential moment of relating itself, qua universality ,
to another. Conscience is the common element of the two self-
consciousnesses, and this element is the substance in which the
deed has an enduring reality , the moment of being recognized and
acknowledged by others. The moral consciousness does not possess
this moment of recognition by others, of pure consciousness which
has a real existence ; and consequently does not act, or actualize
anything at all. Its in-itself is for it either abstract, unreal essence,
or being as a reality which is not spiritual. The existent reality
of conscience, however, is one which is a self an existence which
is conscious of itself, the spiritual element of being recognized
and acknowledged. The action is thus only the translation of
its individual content into the objective element, in which it is uni¬
versal and recognized, and it is just the fact that it is recognized
that makes the deed a reality. The deed is recognized and
thereby made real because the existent reality is directly linked
with conviction or knowledge; or, in other words, knowing
one s purpose is directly the element of existence, is universal
recognition. For the essence of the action, duty, consists in con¬
science s conviction about it; it is just this conviction that is the
in-itself ; it is the implicitly universal self -consciousness, or the state
of being recognized, and hence a reality. What is done with the
conviction of duty is, therefore, at once something that has
standing and a real existence. There is, then, no more talk of
good intentions coming to nothing, or of the good man faring
badly, on the contrary, the duty that is known to be such is
fulfilled and becomes a reality, just because what is essentially
a duty is the universal for all self-consciousnesses, is that which
is recognized and acknowledged and thus positively is. But,
taken separately and alone, without the content of self, duty
is a being-for-another , something transparent which has merely
the significance of an essentiality in general, lacking all content.

641. If we look back on the sphere where spiritual reality
first made its appearance, we find that the Notion involved was


MORALITY


389

that the utterance of individuality is that which is both in and
foritself. But theshape which immediately expressed this Notion
was the honest consciousness which busied itself with the abstract
thing itself [Sache selbst]. This ‘thing itself’ was there a predicate ;
but it is in conscience that it is for the first time a subject which
has made explicit all the moments of consciousness within it,
and for which all these moments, substantiality in general,
external existence, and the essential nature of thought, are con¬
tained in this certainty of itself. The ‘thing itself’ has substanti¬
ality in general in the ethical sphere, external existence in
culture, the self-knowing essentiality of thought in morality;
and in conscience it is the subject that knows these moments
within it. While the ‘honest consciousness’ always seizes merely
the empty thing itself, conscience, on the other hand, wins the
thing in its fullness, a fullness given to it by conscience itself.
Conscience is this power because it knows the moments of con¬
sciousness as moments , dominating them as their negative
essence.

642. When conscience is considered in relation to the single
determinations of the antithesis manifest in action and its
awareness of the nature of those determinations, its relation to
the actual case in which it has to act is, in the first instance,
that of knower. In so far as this knowing has in it the moment
of universality , conscientious action requires that the actual case
before it should be viewed unrestrictedly in all its bearings, and
therefore that all the circumstances of the case should be accu¬
rately known and taken into consideration. But this knowing,
since it knows the universality as a moment , is at the same time
aware that it does not know all the circumstances, or, in other
words, that it does not act conscientiously. The genuinely uni¬
versal and pure relation of knowing would be a relation to some¬
thing not containing an antithesis , a relation to itself; but action ,
in virtue of the antithesis it essentially contains, is related to
a negative of consciousness, to a reality possessing intrinsic being.
Contrasted with the simplicity of pure consciousness, with the
absolute other or implicit manifoldness, this reality is a plurality
of circumstances which breaks up and spreads out endlessly in
all directions, backwards into their conditions, sideways into
their connections, forwards in their consequences. The con¬
scientious mind is aware of this nature of the thing and of its


39 °


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


relation to it, and knows that, in the case in which it acts, it
does not possess that full acquaintance with all the attendant
circumstances which is required, and that its pretence of con¬
scientiously weighing all the circumstances is vain. However,
this acquaintance with, and weighing of, all the circumstances
are not altogether lacking; but they exist only as a moment , as
something which is only for others ; and this incomplete knowledge
is held by the conscientious mind to be sufficient and complete,
because it is its own knowledge.

643. Similarly with the universality of the essence , that is, with
the determination of the content by pure consciousness. Con¬
science, when it proceeds to action, enters into relation with
the many aspects of the case. The case breaks up into its various
separate parts and so, too, does the relation of pure conscious¬
ness to it, with the result that the manifold nature of the case
becomes a multiplicity of duties. Conscience knows that it has
to choose between them, and to make a decision; for none of
them, in its specific character or in its content, is absolute; only
pure duty is that. But this abstraction [of pure duty] has
attained in its reality the significance of the self-conscious T\
The self-certain Spirit rests, qua conscience, within itself, and
its real universality or its duty lies in its pure conviction of duty.
This pure conviction is, as such, as empty as pure duty , is pure
in the sense that there is nothing in it, no specific content that
is a duty. But action is called for, something must be determined
by the individual, and the self-certain Spirit in which the in-
itself has attained the significance of the self-conscious T, knows
that it has this determination and content in the immediate cer¬
tainty of itself. This, as a determination and content, is the natural
consciousness, i.e. impulses and inclinations. Conscience does
not recognize the absoluteness of any content, for it is the abso¬
lute negativity of everything determinate. It determines from
its own seif ; but the sphere of the self into which falls the deter¬
minateness as such is the so-called sense-nature; to have a con¬
tent taken from the immediate certainty of itself means that
it has nothing to draw on but sense-nature. Everything that
in previous forms of experience presented itself as good or bad,
as law and right, is something other than the immediate cer¬
tainty of self; it is a universal which is now a being-for-another.
Or, looked at from another aspect, it is an object which, while


MORALITY


39 1

mediating consciousness with itself, comes between conscious¬
ness and its own truth, so that instead of the object being the
immediacy of consciousness, it rather cuts consciousness off
from itself. For conscience, however, self-certainty is the pure,
immediate truth; and this truth is thus its immediate certainty
of self, conceived as content , i.e. this truth is in general the caprice
of the individual, and the contingency of his unconscious
natural being [his sense-nature].

644. This content at the same time counts as a moral essenti¬
ality or as duty. For pure duty, as was found when testing laws,
is utterly indifferent to any content and tolerates any content.
Here it has, at the same time, the essential form of being-for-
self\ and this form of individual conviction is nothing else but
consciousness of the emptiness of pure duty and of the fact that
pure duty is only a moment, that its substantiality is a predicate
which has its subject in the individual, whose caprice gives it
its content and can associate every content with this form and
attach its conscientiousness to the content. An individual in¬
creases his property in a certain way; it is everyone’s duty to
provide for the support of himself and his family, and no less
to have regard to the possibility of being useful to his fellow men,
and of doing good to those in need. The individual is aware
that this is a duty, for this content is directly contained in his
certainty of himself; furthermore, he perceives that he fulfils
this duty in this particular case. Others, perhaps, hold this spe¬
cific way of behaving to be humbug; they hold to other aspects
of the concrete case, he , however, holds firmly to this aspect,
because he is conscious of the increase of property as a pure
duty. Thus, what others call violence and wrongdoing, is the
fulfilment of the individual’s duty to maintain his independence
in face of others; what they call cowardice, is the duty of sup¬
porting life and the possibility of being useful to others; but
what they call courage violates both duties. But cowardice can¬
not be so inept as not to know that the preservation of life and
the possibility of being useful to others are duties—so inept as
not to be convinced of the moral obligatoriness of its action, and
not to know that this obligatoriness consists in knowing it to be
such. Otherwise it would be guilty of ineptitude, of being
immoral. Since morality lies in the consciousness of having ful¬
filled one’s duty, this will not be lacking when the action is



392


C. (BB.) SPIRIT

called cowardice any more than when it is called courage. The
abstraction called duty, being capable of any content, is also
capable of cowardice. The doer, then, knows what he does to
be a duty, and since he knows this, and the conviction of duty
is the very essence of moral obligation, he is thus recognized
and acknowledged by others. The action is thereby validated
and has an actual existence.

645. It is of no use to object to this freedom, which places
any and every kind of content in the universal passive medium
of‘duty’ and ‘knowing’, by maintaning that another content
ought to have been placed in it; for whatever content it be,
it contains the blemish of determinateness from which pure knowing
is free, determinateness which pure knowing can disdainfully
reject, or equally can accept. Every content, because it is
determinate, stands on the same level as any other, even if it
does seem to be characterized by the elimination in it of the
element of particularity. It may seem that, since, in the actual
case, duty in general is sundered into an antithesis and thereby
into the antithesis of individuality and universality, the duty
whose content is the universal itself directly contains the nature
of pure duty, and form and content are thus completely in
accord. It might seem, then, that action for the general good
is to be preferred to action for the good of the individual; but
this universal duty is simply what already exists as absolute sub¬
stance, as law and right, and is valid on its own account in¬
dependently of the individual’s knowledge and conviction, not
to mention his own immediate interest. It is, therefore, precisely
against the form of that duty that morality in general is directed.
But as regards its content , that too is a determinate content, in so
far as the general good is opposed to the good of the individual.
Consequently, its law is one from which conscience knows itself
to be absolutely free, and it gives itself the authority to add to
and take from, to neglect as well as fulfil it. Then, again, the
above distinction between duty to the individual and duty to
the universal is, in accordance with the nature of the antithesis
as such, not something definitely fixed. The truth is rather that
what the individual does for himself also contributes to the
general good; the more he has made provision for himself, not
only is there a greater possibility of his being of service to others,
but his actual existence itself consists only in his being and living


MORALITY


393

in contact with others. His individual enjoyment essentially has
the meaning of putting what is his own at the disposal of others
and of helping them to obtain their enjoyment. Therefore, in
the fulfilment of duty to individuals and so to oneself, the duty
to the universal is also fulfilled. Any weighing and comparing
of duties which might be made here would be tantamount to
calculating the advantage accruing to the universal from an
action. But firstly, the result would be that morality would be
made dependent on the necessary contingency of insight , and
secondly, it is precisely the essence of conscience to have no
truck with this calculating and weighing of duties, and to make
its own decision without reference to any such reasons.

646. In this way, then, conscience acts and preserves itself
in the unity of its essential and actual being, in the unity of pure
thought and individuality: it is the self-assured Spirit which has
its truth within itself , in its knowledge, and therein as knowledge
of duty. It maintains itself therein by the very fact that what
is positive in the action—the content as well as the form of duty
and the knowledge of it—belongs to the self, to the certainty
of itself; but what seeks to confront the self with an essential being
of its own is held to be something not true, something stripped
of its self-subsistence and only a moment. Consequently, what
counts is not simply knowing in general, but conscience’s know¬
ledge of the circumstances. It places in duty, as the universal
in-itselfness, the content which it takes from its natural indivi¬
duality; for the content is one that is present within itself. This
content, in virtue of the universal medium in which it exists,
becomes the duty which it carries out, and empty pure duty,
just through this action, becomes established as something not
self-subsistent, as only a moment; this content is the cancelled
emptiness of pure duty, or its fulfilment. But even so, conscience
is free from any content whatever; it absolves itself from any
specific duty which is supposed to have the validity of law. In
the strength of its own self-assurance it possesses the majesty
of absolute autarky, to bind and to loose. This self-determination
is therefore without more ado absolutely in conformity with
duty. Duty is the knowing itself; this simple selfhood, however,
is the in-itself; for the in-itself is pure self-identity, and this is
in this consciousness.

647. This pure knowing is immediately a being-for-another;


394


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


for, as pure self-identity, it is immediacy , or being. But this being
is at the same time the pure universal, the selfhood of all: in
other words, the action is acknowledged and therefore actual.
This being is the element whereby conscience stands directly
in a relation of equality with every self-consciousness; and the
meaning of this relation is not an impersonal law, but the self
of conscience.

648. However, in that this right thing which conscience does
is at the same time a being-Jor-another , it seems that a disparity
attaches to conscience. The duty which it fulfils is a specific con¬
tent; it is true that this content is the self of consciousness, and
so consciousness’s knowledge of itself, its identity with itself. But
once fulfilled, set in the medium of being , this identity is no
longer knowing, no longer this process of differentiation in
which its differences are at the same time immediately super¬
seded; on the contrary, in being, the difference is established
as an enduring difference, and the action is a specific action, not
identical with the element of everyone’s self-consciousness, and
therefore not necessarily acknowledged. Both sides, the con¬
science that acts and the universal consciousness that acknow¬
ledges this action as duty, are equally free from the specificity
of this action. On account of this freedom, their relationship
in the common medium of their connection is really a relation
of complete disparity, as a result of which the consciousness
which is explicitly aware of the action finds itself in a state of
complete uncertainty about the Spirit which does the action and
is certain of itself. The latter acts, it gives being to a specific
content; others hold to this being as this Spirit’s truth, and are
therein certain of this Spirit; it has declared therein what it holds
to be duty. But it is free from any specific duty; it is not present
at that point where others imagine it actually to be; and this
very medium of being, and duty as something possessing intrinsic
being, count for it only as a moment. What, therefore, it places
before them it also ‘displaces’ again, or rather has straightway
displaced’ or dissembled. For its actual being is for it not this

duty and determinate character it has put forward, but the ac¬
tuality which it has in the absolute certainty of itself.

649. Others, therefore, do not know whether this conscience
is morally good or evil, or rather they not only cannot know,
but they must also take it to be evil. For, just as it is free from


morality


395

the specificity of duty, and from duty as possessing an intrinsic
being, so likewise are they. What conscience places before them,
they themselves know how to ‘displace 5 or dissemble; it is some¬
thing expressing only the self of another, not their own self: not
only do they know themselves to be free from it, but they must
dispose of it in their own consciousness, nullify it by judging
and explaining it in order to preserve their own self.

650. But the action of conscience is not only this determination
of being which is forsaken by the pure self. What is to be valid,
and to be recognized as duty, is so only through the knowledge
and conviction that it is duty, through the knowledge of oneself
in the deed. If the deed ceases to have this self within it, it ceases
to be that which alone is its essence. Its existence, forsaken by
this consciousness, would be an ordinary reality, and the action
would appear to us to be the fulfilling of one’s pleasure and
desire. What ought to be there , is here an essentiality solely by
its being known to be the self-expression of an individuality; and
it is this being known that is acknowledged by others, and which
as such ought to have an existence.

651. The self enters into existence as self ; the ^elf-assured
Spirit exists as such for others. Its immediate action is not that
which has validity and is actual; what is acknowledged is not
the determinate aspect of the action, not its intrinsic being, but
solely the self-knowing^//' as suCh. The element of lasting being
is the universal self-consciousness; what enters into this element
cannot be the effect of the action: the effect cannot endure in
it, and acquires no permanence; it is only self-consciousness that
is acknowledged and that obtains an actual existence.

652. Here again, then, we see language as the existence of
Spirit. Language is self-consciousness existing/or others, self-con¬
sciousness which as such is immediately present , and as this self-
consciousness is universal. It is the self that separates itself from
itself, which as pure T’ = T becomes objective to itself, which
in this objectivity equally preserves itself as this self, just as it
coalesces directly with other selves and is their self-consciousness.
It perceives itself just as it is perceived by others, and the per¬
ceiving is just existence which has become a self

653. The content which language has here acquired is no
longer the perverted, and perverting and distracted, self of the
world of culture; on the contrary, it is the Spirit that has


396 c - SPIRi t

returned into itself, is certain of itself, and certain in itself of
its truth, or of its own recognition [of that truth], and which
is acknowledged as knowing it. The language of the ethical
Spirit is law and simple command, and complaint, which is
more the shedding of a tear about necessity. Moral conscious¬
ness, on the other hand is still dumb, shut up with itself within
its inner life, for there t e self does not as yet have an existence:
existence and the self stand as yet only in an external relation
to each other. Language, however, only emerges as the middle
term, mediating between independent and acknowledged self-
consciousnesses ; and the existent self is immediately universal ac¬
knowledgement, an acknowledgement on the part of many and
in this manifoldness a simple acknowledgement. The content
of the language of conscience is the self that knows itself as essential
being. This alone is what it declares, and this declaration is the
true actuality of the act, and the validating of the action. Con¬
sciousness declares its conviction ; it is in this conviction alone that
the action is a duty; also it is valid as duty solely through the
conviction being declared. For universal self-consciousness is free
from the specific action that merely is ; what is valid for that self-
consciousness is not the action as an existence, but the conviction
that it is a duty; and this is made actual in language. To make
the deed a reality does not mean here translating its content from
the form of purpose or being-for-self i nto the form of an abstract
reality: it means translating it f rom the form of immediate
self -certainty, which knows its knowledge or being-for-self to be
essential being, into the form of an assurance that consciousness
is convinced of its duty and, as conscience, knows in its own mind
what duty is. This assurance thus affirms that consciousness is
convinced that its conviction is the essence of the matter.

654. Whether the assurance of acting from a conviction of
duty is true, whether what is done is actually a duty —these ques¬
tions or doubts have no meaning when addressed to conscience.
To ask whether the assurance is true would presuppose that
the inner intention is different from the one put forward, i- e -
that what the individual self wills, can be separated from duty,
from the will of the universal and pure consciousness; the latter
would be put into words, but the former would be strictly the
true motive of the action. But this distinction between the uni¬
versal consciousness and the individual selfis just what has been



MORALITY


397

superseded, and the supersession of it is conscience. The self’s
immediate knowing that is certain of itself is law and duty. Its
intention, through being its own intention, is what is right; all
that is required is that it should know this, and should state
its conviction that its knowing and willing are right. The
declaration of this assurance in itself rids the form of its particu¬
larity. It thereby acknowledges the necessary universality of the self.
In calling itself conscience, it calls itself pure knowledge of itself
and pure abstract willing, i.e. it calls itself a universal knowing
and willing which recognizes and acknowledges others, is the
same as them—for they are just this pure self-knowing and will¬
ing—and which for that reason is also recognized and acknow¬
ledged by them. In the will of the self that is certain of itself,
in this knowledge that the self is essential being, lies the essence
of what is right. Therefore, whoever says he acts in such and
such a way from conscience, speaks the truth, for his conscience
is the self that knows and wills. But it is essential that he should
say so, for this self must be at the same time the universal self.
It is not universal in the content of the act, for this, on account
of its specificity, is intrinsically an indifferent affair: it is in the
form of the act that the universality lies. It is this form which
is to be established as actual: it is the self which as such is actual
in language, which declares itself to be the truth, and just by
so doing acknowledges all other selves and is acknowledged by
them.

655- Conscience, then, in the majesty of its elevation above
specific law and every content of duty, puts whatever content
it pleases into its knowing and willing. It is the moral genius
which knows the inner voice of what it immediately knows to
be a divine voice; and since, in knowing this, it has an equally
immediate knowledge of existence, it is the divine creative
power which in its Notion possesses the spontaneity of life.
Equally, it is in its own self divine worship, for its action is the
contemplation of its own divinity.

656. This solitary divine worship is at the same time essenti¬
ally the divine worship of a community , and the pure inner know¬
ing and perceiving of itself advances to the moment of conscious¬
ness. The contemplation of itself is its objective existence and this
objective element is the declaration of its knowing and willing
as something universal. Through this declaration the self




C. (BB.) SPIRIT


398

acquires moral validity and the act becomes an effective deed.
The actuality and lasting existence of what it does is universal
self-consciousness; but the declaration of conscience affirms the
certainty of itself to be pure self, and thereby to be a universal
self. On account of this utterance in which the self is expressed
and acknowledged as essential being, the validity of the act is
acknowledged by others. The spirit and substance of their
association are thus the mutual assurance of their conscientious¬
ness, good intentions, the rejoicing over this mutual purity, and
the refreshing of themselves in the glory of knowing and utter¬
ing, of cherishing and fostering, such an excellent state of affairs.
In so far as this conscience still distinguishes its abstract con¬
sciousness from its self-consciousness , it has only a hidden life in
God; it is true that God is immediately present in its mind and
heart, in its self; but what is manifest, its actual consciousness
and the mediating movement of that consciousness, is for it
something other than that hidden inner life and the immediacy
of God’s presence. It is only in the completed form of conscience
that the distinction between its abstract consciousness and its
self-consciousness is eliminated. Conscience knows that the
abstract consciousness is just this self this being-for-itself that is
certain of itself, knows that it is precisely in the immediacy of
the relation of the self to the in-itself —which when posited outside
the self is an abstract God and hidden from it—that the dif¬
ference is eliminated. For that relation is a mediating one in
which the related terms are not one and the same, but each
is an other for the other, and only in a third term are they one.
The immediate relation, however, means in fact nothing else but
the unity of the terms. The consciousness that has risen above
the thoughtlessness that still holds these differences—which are
none—to be differences, knows the immediacy of the presence
within it of the absolute Being as the unity of that Being and
its own self: it thus knows itself as the living in-itself, and knows
that this knowledge is religion, which as knowledge that has
a perceived or outer existence is the utterance of the community
concerning its own Spirit.

657. Here, then, we see self-consciousness withdrawn into its
innermost being, for which all externality as such has
vanished—withdrawn into the contemplation of the ‘I’ = T’, in
which this T is the whole of essentiality and existence. It is


morality


399

submerged in this Notion of itself, for it has been driven to the
limit of its extremes, and, moreover, in such a way, that the
moments distinguished whereby it is real, or is still consciousness ,
are not only for us these pure extremes; on the contrary, what
it is for itself and what is for it intrinsic and what is for it existence ,
have evaporated into abstractions which no longer have any
stability, any substance, for this consciousness itself; and all that
before was essential being for consciousness has reverted into
these abstractions. Refined into this purity, consciousness exists
in its poorest form, and the poverty which constitutes its sole
possession is itself a vanishing. This absolute certainty into which
substance has resolved itself is the absolute untruth which col¬
lapses internally; it is the absolute self-consciousness in which con¬
sciousness is submerged.

658. Looking at this submergence of consciousness within
itself, we see that the unexplicated substance is, for consciousness,
knowledge as its knowledge. As consciousness, it is divided into
the antithesis of itself and its object which is, for it, essence;
but it is just this object that is perfectly transparent, is its own
self and its consciousness is only this knowledge of itself. All
life, all spiritual essentiality, has withdrawn into this self and
has lost its difference from the / itself. The moments of con¬
sciousness are, therefore, these extreme abstractions, none of
which endures but each of which loses itself in the other and
produces it. It is the fluctuating attitude to itselfof the Unhappy
Consciousness; but here this fluctuation takes place explicitly
for consciousness within itself, and is conscious of being the
Notion of Reason, whereas the Unhappy Consciousness is only
implicitly that Notion. The absolute certainty of itself thus finds
itself, qua consciousness, changed immediately into a sound that
dies away, into an objectification of its being-for-self; but this
created world is its speech , which likewise it has immediately
heard and only the echo of which returns to it. This return,
therefore, does not mean that the self is in essence and actuality
present in its speech; for essence is not for it an it-self or merely
implicit being, but its very self. Just as little has consciousness
an outer existence , for the objective aspect does not get as far as
being a negative of the actual self, in the same way that this
self does not attain to an actual existence. It lacks the power
to externalize itself, the power to make itself into a Thing, and


400


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


to endure [mere] being. It lives in dread of besmirching the
splendour of its inner being by action and an existence; and,
in order to preserve the purity of its heart, it flees from contact
with the actual world, and persists in its self-willed impotence
to renounce its self which is reduced to the extreme of ultimate
abstraction, and to give itself a substantial existence, or to trans¬
form its thought into being and put its trust in the absolute dif¬
ference [between thought and being]. The hollow object which
it has produced for itself now fills it, therefore, with a sense of
emptiness. Its activity is a yearning which merely loses itself
as consciousness becomes an object devoid of substance, and,
rising above this loss, and falling back on itself, finds itself only
as a lost soul. In this transparent purity of its moments, an un-
happy, so-called ‘beautiful soul’, its light dies away within it,
and it vanishes like a shapeless vapour that dissolves into thin


air.


^59* This silent fusion of the pithless essentialities of the eva¬
porated life has, however, still to be taken in the other meaning
o{ the actuality of conscience, and in the manifestation of its move¬
ment: conscience has to be considered as acting. The objective
moment in this consciousness acquired above the determination
of a universal consciousness. The knowledge that knows itself
is, qua this particular self, distinct from other selves; the lan¬
guage in which all reciprocally acknowledge each other as act¬
ing conscientiously, this universal identity, falls apart into the
non-identity of individual being-for-self: each consciousness is
just as much simply reflected out of its universality into itself.
As a result, the antithesis of individuality to other individuals,
and to the universal, inevitably comes on the scene, and we
have to consider this relationship and its movement. In other
words, this universality and duty have the very opposite signifi¬
cance of the specific individuality that exempts itself from the
universal, for which pure duty is only a universality that
appears on the surface, and is turned outwards: duty is only
a matter of words, and counts as a being-for-another. Con¬
science, which in the first instance is only negatively directed
against duty as this given specific duty, knows itself to be free from
it; but since it fills the empty duty with a specific content from
itself\ it is positively aware that it, as this particular self, makes
the content. Its pure self, as an empty knowing, is something


MORALITY


401


devoid of content and determination. The content which it
gives to that knowing is taken from its own self, as this specific
self, is taken from itself as a natural individuality. And, in speak¬
ing of the conscientiousness of its action, it may well be aware
of its pure self, but in the purpose of its action, a purpose with
an actual content, it is aware of itself as this particular indivi¬
dual, and is conscious of the antithesis between what it is for
itself and what it is for others, of the antithesis of universality
or duty and its reflection out of universality into itself.

660. While in this way the antithesis, into which conscience
enters when it acts , expresses itself in its inner being, the anti¬
thesis is at the same time a disparity on its outer side in the
element of existence, the disparity of its particular individuality
in relation to another individual. Its particularity consists in
the fact that the two moments constituting its consciousness,
the self and the in-itself, are held to be unequal in value within
it, a disparity in which they are so determined that the certainty
of itself is the essential being in face of the in-itself or the uni¬
versal, which counts only as a moment. In contrast to this inter¬
nal determination there thus stands the element of existence
or universal consciousness, for which the essential being is
rather universality, duty; while individuality, on the other
hand, which in contrast to the universal is for itself, counts only
as a superseded moment. For the consciousness which holds
firmly to duty, the first consciousness counts as evil , because of
the disparity between its inner being and the universal; and since,
at the same time, this first consciousness declares its action to
be in conformity with itself, to be duty and conscientiousness,
it is held by the universal consciousness to be hypocrisy.

661. The movement of this antithesis is in the first instance the
formal production of an identity of what the evil consciousness
is in its own self and what it declares itself to be; it must be
made apparent that it is evil, and thus its existence made to
correspond to its essence; the hypocrisy must be unmasked.
This return of the disparity present in hypocrisy into a corre¬
spondence is not already an accomplished fact because hypo¬
crisy, as is commonly said, demonstrates its respect for duty and
virtue just by making a show of them, and using them as a mask
to hide itself from its own consciousness, no less than from
others; as if in this acknowledgement of the antithesis within


402


C. (BB.) SPIRIT

itself, identity and correspondence were implied. Only, it is at
the same time just as much reflected out of this spoken acknow¬
ledgement and into itself; and the fact that it uses what is an
essence as a being-for-another implies rather its own contempt for
that essence, and the exposure to everyone of its own lack of
any substantial being. For what lets itself be used as an external
instrument shows itself to be a thing which possesses no impor¬
tance of its own.

662. Also, this identity is not brought about either by the
one-sided persistence of the evil consciousness in its own atti¬
tude, or by the judgement of the universal consciousness. If the
former denies itself in face of the consciousness of duty, and de¬
clares that what this asserts to be wickedness, to be absolutely
non-identical with the universal, is an action in accordance
with inner law and conscience, then in this one-sided assurance
of an identity there still remains its non-identity with the other,
since this other does not believe it or acknowledge it. In other
words, since the one-sided persistence in one extreme cancels
itself out, evil would, it is true, thereby confess to being evil,
but in so doing it would directly abolish itself and cease to be
hypocrisy, and would not, as such, unmask itself. It admits, in
fact, to being evil by asserting that it acts, in opposition to the
acknowledged universal, according to its own inner law and
conscience. For if this law and conscience were not the law of
its single individuality and caprice, it would not be something
inner or peculiar to it, but what is universally acknowledged.
Therefore, when anyone says that he is acting according to his
own law and conscience against others, he is saying, in fact, that
he is wronging them. But actual conscience is not this persistence
in a knowing and willing that opposes itself to the universal;
on the contrary, the universal is the element of its existence,
and its language declares its action to be an acknowledged duty.

663. Just as little is the persistence of the universal conscious¬
ness in its judgement an unmasking and abolition of hypocrisy.
In denouncing hypocrisy as base, vile, and so on, it is appealing
in such judgement to its own law, just as the evil consciousness
appeals to its law. For the former comes forward in opposition
to the latter and thereby as a particular law. It has, therefore,
no superiority over the other law, rather it legitimizes it. And
this zeal does the very opposite of what it means to do; for it


MORALITY


403

shows that what it calls true or genuine duty and which ought
to be universally acknowledged, is something not acknowledged *
in so doing it concedes to the other an equal right to be for itself.

664. This judgement has, however, at the same time another
aspect from which it becomes the way to a resolution of the
antithesis confronting it. The consciousness of the universal in
its relation to the first [evil] consciousness, does not behave as
one that is actual and acts —for the latter is rather the actual
consciousness—but in its antithesis to it, is a consciousness that
is not entangled in the antithesis of individuality and uni¬
versality, which occurs when action is entered upon. It remains
in the universality of thought , behaves as a consciousness that
apprehends , and its first action is merely one of judgement. Now
through this judgement, it places itself, as we have just
remarked, alongside the first consciousness, and the latter, through
this likeness , comes to see its own self in this other consciousness.
For the consciousness of duty maintains an attitude of passive
apprehension; but it is thereby in contradiction with itself as
the absolute will of duty, as a consciousness whose determining
comes solely from itself. It does well to preserve itself in its
purity, for it does not act ; it is the hypocrisy which wants its judg¬
ing to be taken for an actual deed, and instead of proving its
rectitude by actions, does so by uttering fine sentiments. Its
nature, then, is altogether the same as that which is reproached
with making duty a mere matter of words. In both alike, the
side of reality is distinct from the words uttered: in the one,
through the selfish purpose of the action, in the other, through
the failure to act at all, although the necessity to act is involved
in the very talk of duty, for duty without deeds is utterly mean¬
ingless.

665. Judging, however, is also to be looked at as a positive
act of thought and has a positive content. Through this aspect,
the contradiction present in the apprehending consciousness,
and its identity with the first consciousness, become still more
complete. The consciousness that acts declares its specific action
to be a duty, and the consciousness that judges it cannot deny
this; for duty itself is the form which lacks all content but is
capable of any. In other words, the concrete action which in
its many-sidedness is in its own self diverse, contains the uni¬
versal aspect—that which is taken as duty—just as much as the


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


404

particular aspect which constitutes the share and interest of the
individual in the action. Now, the judging consciousness does
not stop short at the former aspect of duty, at the doer’s know¬
ledge of it, that this is his duty, and at the fact that the doer
knows it to be his duty, the condition and status of his reality.
On the contrary, it holds to the other aspect, looks at what the
action is in itself, and explains it as resulting from an intention
different from the action itself, and from selfish motives. Just as
every action is capable of being looked at from the point of view
of conformity to duty, so too can it be considered from the point
of view of the particularity [of the doer]; for, qua action, it is
the actuality of the individual. This judging of the action thus
takes it out of its outer existence and reflects it into its inner
aspect, or into the form of its own particularity. If the action
is accompanied by fame, then it knows this inner aspect to be
a desire for fame. If it is altogether in keeping with the station
of the individual, without going beyond thisstation, and of such
a nature that the individuality does not possess its station as
a character externally attached to it, but through its own self
gives filling to this universality, thereby showing itself capable
of a higher station, then the inner aspect of the action is judged
to be ambition, and so on. Since, in the action as such, the doer
attains to a vision of himself in objectivity, or to a feeling of self
in his existence, and thus to enjoyment, the inner aspect is
judged to be an urge to secure his own happiness, even though
this were to consist merely in an inner moral conceit, in the
enjoyment of being conscious of his own superiority and in the
foretaste of a hope of future happiness. No action can escape
such judgement, for duty for duty’s sake, this pure purpose, is
an unreality; it becomes a reality in the deed of an individu¬
ality, and the action is thereby charged with the aspect of parti¬
cularity. No man is a hero to his valet; not, however, because
the man is not a hero, but because the valet—is a valet, whose
dealings are with the man, not as a hero, but as one who eats,
drinks, and wears clothes, in general, with his individual wants
and fancies. Thus, for the judging consciousness, there is no
action in which it could not oppose to the universal aspect of
the action, the personal aspect of the individuality, and play
the part of the moral valet towards the agent. 1

1 CF Lectures on Philosophy of World History (H. B. Nisbet’s transl. p. 87).


MORALITY


405

666. The consciousness that judges in this way is itself base,
because it divides up the action, producing and holding fast
to the disparity of the action with itself. Further, it is hypocrisy,
because it passes off such judging, not as another manner of
being wicked, but as the correct consciousness of the action,
setting itself up in this unreality and conceit of knowing well
and better above the deeds it discredits, and wanting its words
without deeds to be taken for a superior kind of reality. By put¬
ting itself, then, in this way on a level with the doer on whom
it passes judgement, it is recognized by the latter as the same
as himself. This latter does not merely find himself apprehended
by the other as something alien and disparate from it, but rather
finds that other, according to its own nature and disposition,
identical with himself. Perceiving this identity and giving
utterance to it, he confesses this to the other, and equally expects
that the other, having in fact put himself on the same level,
will also respond in words in which he will give utterance to
this identity with him, and expects that this mutual recognition
will now exist in fact. His confession is not an abasement, a
humiliation, a throwing-away of himself in relation to the
other; for this utterance is not a one-sided affair, which would
establish his disparity with the other: on the contrary, he gives
himself utterance solely on account of his having seen his
identity with the other; he, on his side, gives expression to their
common identity in his confession, and gives utterance to it for
the reason that language is the existence of Spirit as an immediate
self. He therefore expects that the other will contribute his part
to this existence.

667. But the confession of the one who is wicked, T am so’,
is not followed by a reciprocal similar confession. This was not
what the judging consciousness meant: quite the contrary. It
repels this community of nature, and is the hard heart that is
for itself , and which rejects any continuity with the other. As
a result, the situation is reversed. The one who made the con¬
fession sees himself repulsed, and sees the other to be in the wrong
when he refuses to let his own inner being come forth into the
outer existence of speech, when the other contrasts the beauty
of his own soul with the penitent’s wickedness, yet confronts
the confession of the penitent with his own stiff-necked un¬
repentant character, mutely keeping himself to himself and


4 o6 C. (BB.) SPIRIT

refusing to throw himself away for someone else. There is here
expressed in its extreme form the rebellion of the Spirit that
is certain of itself; for it beholds itself, as this simple self-know¬
ledge, in someone else, and, too, in such a way that even the
outer shape of this other is not, as in the case of material wealth,
something without substantial being, is not a Thing; on the con¬
trary, what is held opposed to this other is Thought, simply
knowledge itself, this absolutely fluid continuity of pure knowing
which refuses to put itself into communication with the other
which, in its confession, had ipso facto renounced its separate
being-for-self and thereby expressly superseded its particularity,
and in so doing posited itself in continuity with the other as
a universal. The other, however, retains within itself and for itself
its uncommunicative being-for-self; and it retains, in face of the
individual who did confess, just the same uncommunicative
being-for-self, although the latter has already thrown this away.
It thereby reveals itself as a consciousness which is forsaken by
and which itself denies Spirit; for it does not know that Spirit,
in the absolute certainty of itself, is lord and master over every
deed and actuality, and can cast them off, and make them as
if they had never happened. At the same time, it does not recog¬
nize the contradiction it falls into in not letting the rejection
which has taken place in words , be validated as a genuine rejec¬
tion, while itself has the certainty of its Spirit, not in an actual
deed, but in its inner being, and finds the outer existence of
this inner being in the utterance of its judgement. It is thus its
own self which hinders that other’s return from the deed into
the spiritual existence of speech and into the identity of Spirit,
and by this hardness of heart produces the disparity which still
exists.

668. Now, in so far as the self-certain Spirit, as a ‘beautiful
soul , does not possess the power to renounce the knowledge
of itself which it keeps to itself, it cannot attain to an identity
with the consciousness it has repulsed, nor therefore to a vision
of the unity of itself in the other, cannot attain to an objective
existence. Consequently, the identity comes about only nega¬
tively, as a being devoid of Spirit. The ‘beautiful soul’, lacking
an actual existence, entangled in the contradiction between its
pure self and the necessity of that self to externalize itself and
change itself into an actual existence, and dwelling in the imme -


MORALITY


407

diacy of this firmly held antithesis—an immediacy which alone
is the middle term reconciling the antithesis, which has been
intensified to its pure abstraction, and is pure being or empty
nothingness—this ‘beautiful soul’, then, being conscious of this
contradiction in its unreconciled immediacy, is disordered to
the point of madness, wastes itself in yearning and pines away
in consumption. Thereby it does in fact surrender the being-for-
self to which it so stubbornly clings; but what it brings forth
is only the non-spiritual unity of [mere] being.

669. The true, i.e. the self-conscious and existent , equalization
of the two sides is necessitated by and already contained in the
foregoing. The breaking of the hard heart, and the raising of
it to universality, is the same movement which was expressed
in the consciousness that made confession of itself. The wounds
of the Spirit heal, and leave no scars behind. The deed is not
imperishable; it is taken back by Spirit into itself, and the aspect
of individuality present in it, whether as intention or as an
existent negativity and limitation, straightway vanishes. The
self that carries out the action, the form of its act, is only a moment
of the whole, and so likewise is the knowledge, that by its judge¬
ment determines and establishes the distinction between the in¬
dividual and universal aspects of the action. The evil conscious¬
ness, referred to above, posits this externalization of itself, or
posits itself, as a moment, being enticed into openly confessing
itself by the vision of itself in the other. But just as the former
has to surrender its one-sjded, unacknowledged existence of its
particular being-for-self, so too must this other set aside its one¬
sided, unacknowledged judgement. And just as the former
exhibits the power of Spirit over its actual existence, so does
this other exhibit the power of Spirit over the specific Notion
of itself.

670. The latter, however, renounces the divisive thought,
and the hard-heartedness of the being-for-self which clings to
it, because it has in fact seen itself in the first. This first con¬
sciousness which turns its back on its actual existence, and
makes itself into a superseded particular consciousness, thereby
displays itself as in fact a universal. It returns from its external
actual existence back into itself as essential being, and therein
the universal consciousness thus recognizes itself The forgive¬
ness which it extends to the other is the renunciation of itself,


C. (BB.) SPIRIT


408

of its unreal essential being which it put on a level with that
other which was a real action, and acknowledges that what
thought characterized as bad, viz. action, is good; or rather
it abandons this distinction of the specific thought and its subjec¬
tively determined judgement, just as the other abandons its sub¬
jective characterization of action. The word of reconciliation is
the objectively existent Spirit, which beholds the pure knowledge
of itself qua universal essence, in its opposite, in the pure know¬
ledge of itself qua absolutely self-contained and exclusive indivi¬
duality —a reciprocal recognition which is absolute Spirit.

671. It enters into existence only at that point where its pure
knowledge about itself is the antithesis and alternation [of its
dual aspect]. Aware that its pure knowledge is an abstract
essence , absolute Spirit is this conscious duty in absolute anti¬
thesis to the knowledge that is conscious of itself, qua absolute
individuality of self, as essence. The former is the pure continuity
of the universal, which is aware that the individuality which
is conscious of itself as essence, is intrinsically a nullity, is evil.
This, however, is the absolute discreteness which is conscious
of itself in its pure oneness as absolute, and of the universal as
something unreal, which exists only for someone else. Both aspects
are purified into the unity in which there is no longer in them
any existence devoid of self, any negative of consciousness,
where, on the contrary, duty is the unchanging identical charac¬
ter of its self-knowledge, and evil equally has its purpose in its
being-within-itself and its actuality in its utterance. The content
of this utterance is the substance of its enduring existence; it
is the assurance of Spirit’s immanent self-certainty. Each of
these two self-certain Spirits has no other purpose than its own
pure self, and no other reality and existence than just this pure
self. But yet they are different; and the difference is absolute
because it is set in this element of the pure Notion. It is also
absolute, not only for us, but for the Notions themselves which
stand in this antithesis. For these Notions, though specific in rela¬
tion to one another, are at the same time in themselves uni¬
versal, so that they fill out the whole range of the self, and this
self has no other content than this its own determinateness,
which neither goes beyond the self nor is more restricted than
it; for one of them, the absolute universal, is equally the pure
knowledge of itself, as the other is the absolute discreteness of


MORALITY


409


individuality, and both are only this pure self-knowledge. Both
determinatenesses are thus pure conscious Notions, whose
determinatenness is itself immediately a knowing, or whose rela¬
tionship and antithesis is the ‘I’. Consequently, they are these
sheer opposites for one another ; it is the completely inner being
which thus confronts its own self and enters into outer existence.
They constitute pure knowledge which, through this antithesis,
is posited as consciousness. But it is still not yet self-consciousness.
It becomes actually such in the movement of this antithesis.
For this antithesis is rather itself the indiscrete continuity and
identity ofT’ = T’; and each, through the very contradiction of its
pure universality, which at the same time still strives against
its identity with the other, and cuts itself off from it, explicitly
supersedes itself within its own self. Through this externaliza-
tion, this knowledge which in its existence is self-discordant
returns into the unity of the self. It is the actual ‘I 5 , the universal
knowledge of itself in its absolute opposite , in the knowledge which
remains internal , and which, on account of the purity of its
separated being-within-self is itself completely universal. The
reconciling Yea , in which the two T’s let go their antithetical
existence , is the existence of the T’ which has expanded into a
duality, and therein remains identical with itself, and, in its
complete externalization and opposite, possesses the certainty
of itself: it is God manifested in the midst of those, who know
themselves in the form of pure knowledge.


(CC.) RELIGION
