VII. RELIGION

672. In the structured forms hitherto considered which a ^

distinguished in general as Consciousness, Self-consciousn ^
Reason, and Spirit, religion, too, as consciousness o ^
Being as such, has indeed made its appearance, althoug c j” te
from the standpoint of the consciousness that is conscious o a so ^
Being; but absolute Being in and for itself, the self-consciousn
of Spirit, has not appeared in those ‘shapes’. .

673. Even Consciousness, in so far as it is the Understand*
is consciousness of the supersensible or the inner side of ob J eC ,
existence. But the supersensible, the eternal, or whatever e
it may be called, is devoid of self; it is only, to begin with,
universal which is a long way yet from being Spirit that know

itself as Spirit. Then there was the self-consciousncss t
reached its final ‘shape’ in the Unhappy Consciousness, that w
only the pain of the Spirit that wrestled, but without succe.,
to reach out into objectivity. The unity of the individual st

consc lousness and hs changdess es tQ which the form

attains, remains, therefore, a beyond for self-consciousness. ^
immediate existence of Reason which, for us, issued from tha

const-- n . lts P ccubar shapes, have no religion, because tbe * e .

presem thcm knows or seeks in thc immed *

relieion^i” ^ otbcr hand, in the ethical world we did „
h. the u-n H Y ’ \ hc rdi S ion of the underworld. It is the belief
Of the debar ? Unknown ni § ht of Fate and in the Eumenid
the f ° rmer is P«« negativity in the form
-me negativity in the form of n-
self and hre r / • te Bein § 1S , in the latter form, indeed

the indiGd ’ S ‘.r Ce ° thcr than P resent the self cannot be. Bu
from itself ,h S<? f ‘ S /Aw individual shade which has separate
a sup^ed P H e which Fate is. True, it is a shade

negate st^fi art,CUlarSelf > and thus a universal self; but the
g C S! g ni hcance of the shade has still not changed round


RELIGION


4* 1

the positive significance of the universal self, and therefore
'^superseded self still has, at the same time, the immediate
e fi ca nce of this particular and essenceless being. But Fate
sl ® nl -j of self remains the unconscious night which does not

^ eV ° to an immanent differentiation, nor to the clarity o se
attain i

^This belief in the nothingness of necessity and in the
j^wnrld becomes belief in Heaven, because the depar e
“IS nhe witb its universality, must explicate in ? -
SC ' f ™, ’ what it contains and thus become dear to *
verS . ^of faith, however, we saw unfold its content on y
kingdom without the [concrete] Notion,and 0T , '

elem n perish in its fate, viz. in the religion of the Enhght-
reaS ° » P In this religion, the supersensible beyond
enI T ending is reinstated, but in such a way that self- on

Q In th^religio^of morality, the fact that

is b0U " d t i P t the same time taken back into < he self ’‘ are
belHg tha , shut up, and a dijerentiated content "hose p

it remal " mediatei; negated as they are P roduC ^ nt ^" he self
just as imm . , en e U ir s this contradictory movemen
io—: ;»i-as .he Fate otwha. .s ««»'«'
which i s c pdiately its

actU(li The self-knowing Spirit is, in religion ,jmm ^ been
677 * if consciousness. Those forms of 1 . . an d

own P ure ^ z ° the true Spirit, the -1^^^ in

considered. V1 . j 0 f itself, together constitu F’ .

.he Spin' '^“b, confronting its u*«, does iB

its tons" 00 in conscience it brings use > jc , u re-

jtself ‘ h '- r ' r| ,“ in general, in.o subjection, as » j J ou ,„ess

objective ’ cific No.ions, and is now a ei «d as

thinking and i0 own self. In tins,Spn' Spiri ,

^b;r^^ Li " s ' in,ha,u

of Nature-


412


C. (CC.) RELIGION


is the object of its consciousness; but because in religion con¬
sciousness is posited essentially in the determination of self-con-
sciousness, the shape is perfectly transparent to itself; and the
reality it contains is shut up in it and superseded in it in just
the same way as when we speak of ‘all reality’; it is universal
reality as thought.

678. Since, then, in religion the determination of the con¬
sciousness proper of Spirit does not have the form of free other¬
ness, , Spirit's existence is distinct from its self-consciousness , and its
reality proper falls outside of religion. There is indeed one Spirit
of both, but its consciousness does not embrace both together,
and religion appears as a part of existence, of conduct and
activity, whose other part is the life lived in its real world. As
we now know that Spirit in its own world and Spirit conscious
of itself as Spirit, or Spirit in religion, are the same, the perfec¬
tion of religion consists in the two becoming identical with each
other: not only that religion concerns itself with Spirit’s reality
but, conversely, that Spirit, as self-conscious Spirit, becomes
actual to itself and object of its consciousness. So far as Spirit in
religion pictures itself to itself, it is indeed consciousness, and the
reality enclosed within religion is the shape and the guise of
its picture-thinking. But, in this picture-thinking, reality does
not receive its perfect due, viz. to be not merely a guise but
an independent free existence; and, conversely, because it lacks
perfection within itself it is a specific shape which does not attain
to what it ought to show forth, viz. Spirit that is conscious of
itself. If its shape is to express Spirit itself, it must be nothing
else than Spirit, and Spirit must appear to itself, or be in actu¬
ality, what it is in its essence. Only by so doing would that also
be obtained which may seem to be the demand for the opposite,
viz. that the object of its consciousness have at the same time
the form of free actuality; but only Spirit that is object to itself
as absolute Spirit is conscious of itself as a free actuality to the
extent that it is and remains conscious of itself therein.

679. When self-consciousness and consciousness proper, reli¬
gion and Spirit in its world, or Spirit’s existence , are in the first
instance distinguished from each other, the latter consists in the
totality of Spirit so far as its moments exhibit themselves in
separation, each on its own account. But the moments are con¬
sciousness , self-consciousness , Reason , and Spirit —Spirit, that is, as


RELIGION


413


immediate Spirit, which is not yet consciousness of Spirit. Their
totality, taken together, constitutes Spirit in its mundane existence
generally; Spirit as such contains the previous structured shapes
in universal determinations, in the moments just named. Reli¬
gion presupposes that these have run their full course and is
their simple totality or absolute self. The course traversed by
these moments is, moreover, in relation to religion, not to be
represented as occurring in Time. Only the totality of Spirit
is in Time, and the ‘shapes’, which are ‘shapes’ of the totality
of Spirit, display themselves in a temporal succession, for only
the whole has true actuality and therefore the form of pure free¬
dom in face of an ‘other’, a form which expresses itself as Time.
But the moments of the whole, consciousness, self-consciousness,
Reason, and Spirit, just because they are moments, have no
existence in separation from one another. Just as Spirit was dis¬
tinguished from its moments, so we have further, in the third
place, to distinguish from these moments themselves their in¬
dividual determination. We saw that each of those moments
was differentiated again in its own self into a process of its own,
and assumed different ‘shapes’: as, e.g., in consciousness, sense-
certainty and perception were distinct from each other. These
latter shapes fall apart in Time and belong to a particular totality.
For Spirit descends from its universality to individuality
through determination. The determination, or middle term, is
consciousness, self-consciousness, and so on. But individuality is
constituted by the shapes assumed by these moments. These,
therefore, exhibit Spirit in its individuality or actuality, and are
distinguished from one another in Time, though in such a way
that the later moment retains within it the preceding one.

680. If, therefore, religion is the perfection of Spirit into
which its individual moments—consciousness, self-conscious¬
ness, Reason, and Spirit—return and have returned as into
their ground, they together constitute the existent actuality of
the totality of Spirit, which is only as the differentiating and
self-returning movement of these its aspects. The genesis of reli¬
gion in general is contained in the movement of the universal
moments. But since each of these attributes was exhibited, not
merely as it determines itself in general, but as it is in and for
itself, i.e. as it runs its course as a totality within itself, therefore,
what has come to be is not merely the genesis of religion in


4 1 4


C- (CC.) RELIGION

general: those complete processes of the individual aspects at the
same time contain the specific forms otr<t \\eion itself Th„ ,
of Spirit, the Spirit of religion, is agaitfthe “ovelt ° a ^av
from its immediacy towards the attainment of the knowleZ of
what it is in itself or immediately, the movement in which fin
ally the shape in which it appears for its consciousness will be
perfectly identical with its essence, and it will behold itself aJ

V\ u g f n T S ° frellg ' 0n ’ S P irit itself therefore assumes
specific shapes which constitute the different moments of this

movement; at the same time, the specific religion has likewise
a specific actual Spirit. Thus, if consciousness, self-conscious¬
ness, Reason, and Spirit belong to self-knowing Spirit in
general, similarly the specific ‘shapes’ which were specials de¬
veloped within consciousness, self-consciousness, Reason and
Spirit, belong to the specific ‘shapes’ of self-knowing Spirit
From the ‘shapes belonging to each of its moments, the specific
shape of religion picks out the one appropriate to it for its
actua Spirit. The one distinctive feature which characterizes
the religion penetrates every aspect of its actual existence and
stamps them with this common character
68,. i n this way, the arrangement of the ‘shapes’ which have
hitherto appeared differs from the way they appeared in their
own order. On this point we shall observe briefly at the start
what ,s necessary. In the series we considered, each moment,
exploring its own depths, formed itself into a totality within its
own peculiar principle; and cognition was the depth, or the
^pirit, wherein the moments which have no other subsistence
o^ their own possessed their substance. But this substance is now

Tes n S V ‘i] 1S \ P , Pirlt that is certain of itself > which

aoes not allow the principle of each individual moment to

oecome isolated and to make itself a totality within itself- on
tnec on t ra atheringand holding together all these moments
wi hm ,tself ,t advances within this total wealth of its actual
opint, and all its particular moments take and receive in com-
mon mto themselves the like determinateness of the whole. This
seu-certam Spirit and its movement is their true actuality and
wi t bemg-in-and-for-self which belongs to each moment. Thus
wnile the previous single series in its advance marked the retro¬
gressive steps in it by nodes, but continued itself again from
tnem in a single line, it is now, as it were, broken at these nodes,





RELIGION

415

at these universal moments, and falls apart into many \[
which, gathered up into a single bundle, at the same time con
bine symmetrically so that the similar differences in which ea^
particular moment took shape within itself meet together °

However, it is self-evident from the whole exposition how th’
co-ordination of the general directions here represented is t^
be understood; so that it is superfluous to remark that these
differences are to be grasped essentially only as moments of the
development, not as parts. In actual Spirit, they are attributes
of its substance, but in religion, on the other hand, they are
only predicates of the Subject. Similarly, all forms in general
are certainly in themselves or for ns contained in Spirit and in
each Spirit, but as regards Spirit’s actuality, the main point
is solely which determinateness is explicit for it in its conscious¬
ness, in which determinateness it has expressed its self, or in
which ‘shape’ it knows its essence.

682. The distinction which was made between actual Spirit
and Spirit that knows itself as Spirit, or between itself, qua con¬
sciousness, and qua self-consciousness, is superseded in the Spirit
that knows itself in its truth; its consciousness and its self-con¬
sciousness are on the same level. But, as religion here is, to begin
with, immediate , this distinction has not yet returned into Spirit
What is posited is only the Notion of religion; in this the essence
is self-consciousness, which is conscious of being all truth and
contains all reality within that truth. This self-consciousness
has, as consciousness, itself for object. Spirit which, to begin
with, has an immediate knowledge of itself is thus to itself Spirit
in th c form of immediacy, and the determinateness of the form
in which it appears to itself is that of [mere] being. This being,
it is true, is filled neither with sensation nor a manifold material,
nor with any other kind of one-sided moments, purposes, and
determinations: it is filled with Spirit and is known by itself
to be all truth and reality. Such filling is not identical with its
shape, Spirit qua essence is not identical with its consciousness.
Spirit is actual as absolute Spirit only when it is also for itself
in its truth as it is in its certainty of itself, or when the extremes
into which, as consciousness, it parts itself are explicitly for each
other in the shape of Spirit. The shape which Spirit assumes
as object of its consciousness remains filled by the certainty of
Spirit as by its substance; through this content, the object is


4l6 c. (CC.) religion

saved from being degraded to pure objectivity, to the form of
negativity of self-consciousness. Spirit’s immediate unity with
itself is the basis, or pure consciousness, within which conscious¬
ness parts asunder [into the duality of subject and object]. In
this way Spirit, shut up wkhin its pure self-consciousness, does
not exist in religion as the creator of a Nature in general; what
it does create in this movement are its shapes qua Spirits, which
together constitute the completeness of its manifestation. And
this movement itself is the genesis of its complete reality through
its individual aspects, or through its incomplete shapes.

683. The first reality of Spirit is the Notion of religion itself,
or religion as immediate , and therefore Natural Religion. In this,
Spirit knows itself as its object in a natural or immediate shape.
The second reality, however, is necessarily that in which Spirit
knows itself in the shape of a superseded natural existence, or of
the self. This, therefore, is the Religion of Art; for the shape
raises itself to the form of the self through the creative activity
of consciousness whereby this beholds in its object its act or the
self. Finally, the third reality overcomes the one-sidedness of
the first two; the self is just as much an immediacy, as the imme¬
diacy is the self. If, in the first reality, Spirit in general is in
the form of consciousness, and in the second, in that of self-con¬
sciousness, in the third it is in the form of the unity of both.
It has the shape of being-in-and-for-itself; and when it is thus
conceived as it is in and for itself, this is the Revealed Religion.
But although in this, Spirit has indeed attained its true shape ,
yet the shape itself and the picture-thought are still the un¬
vanquished aspect from which Spirit must pass over into the
Notion, in order wholly to resolve therein the form of objec¬
tivity, in the Notion which equally embraces within itself its
own opposite. It is then that Spirit has grasped the Notion of
itself, just as we now have first grasped it; and its shape or the
element of its existence, being the Notion, is Spirit itself.
