A. NATURAL RELIGION

684. The Spirit that knows Spirit is consciousness of itself and
is present to itself in objective form; it is; and is at the same
time being that is for itself. It is for itself \ it is the aspect of self-
consciousness, and that too, in contrast to the aspect of its con-


NATURAL RELIGION


4*7


sciousness, or of the relating of itself to itself as object. In its con¬
sciousness there is antithesis, and in consequence the specific
character of the ‘shape’ in which it appears to itself and knows
itself. It is solely with this that we are concerned in this
treatment of religion; for we have already considered its un¬
embodied essence, or its pure Notion. But at the same time the
difference of consciousness and self-consciousness falls w^hin
the latter; the ‘shape’ of religion contains, not the existence of
Spirit as Nature that is free from thought, nor as a thought that
is free from existence; but it is an existence that is preserved
in thinking, and also something thought that is objectivelv
present to it. It is in accordance with the specific character of
this ‘shape’ in which Spirit knows itself that one religion is dis¬
tinguished from another; but we have at the same time to note
that the exposition of this knowledge of itself within the frame¬
work of this single specific character does not in fact exhaust
the totality of an actual religion. The series of different religions
which will come to view, just as much sets forth again only
the different aspects of a single religion, and, moreover, of
every single religion, and the ideas which seem to distinguish
one actual religion from another occur in each one. At the
same time, however, the difference must also be viewed as
a difference of religion. For since Spirit lives in the difference
of its consciousness and its self-consciousness, the aim of the
movement is to supersede this cardinal distinction and to
give the form of self-consciousness to the ‘shape’ that is the
object of consciousness. But this difference is not superseded
simply by the fact that the ‘shapes’ contained by self-con¬
sciousness have within them the moment of self, and that God
is thought of as self-consciousness. The self that is thought of is not
the actual self; in order that the self, like any other more precise
determination of‘shape’, may in truth belong to this ‘shape’,
it must, on the one hand, be posited in the ‘shape’ by the act
ofself-consciousness, and, on the other hand, the lower determi¬
nation must show itself to be reduced to a moment of the higher
and to be comprehended by it. For what is thought of , ceases
to be something [merely] thought of, something alien to the
self’s knowledge, only when the self has produced it, and there¬
fore beholds the determination of the object as its own, con¬
sequently beholds itself in the object. Through this activity, the


4.8


c. (CC.) RELIGION

haS , a ' ,h ' Sam ' ,im ' vanished; for .he ac.

L f l IS rea ' lzed « th ' expense of something else.

In so far as the lower determination is still present, it has

where rheT„ t0anUne n S a n,ial “P'«ijus. as, on .he other hand,
1S StlU dom mant but the higher is also present,

ihe°r n A^ e ri mm r U °r ? CV ° id self has its place alongside the
other. Accordingly, if the various ideas within a particular reli¬
gion do indeed exhibit the entire movement of its ‘shapes’, the
c arac er o eac idea is determined by the particular unity

°t. C< f nSC1< L USneS ir an d se ^' cons ciousness [in that religion], i.e. by
t e act that self-consciousness embraces within itself the deter-
mination ° t^ e object of consciousness, by its act has completely
appropriate it and knows it as the essential determination in
ace ° t e °t er. The truth of the belief in a determination of
the rehgious Spirit iS revealed in the fact that the constitution
ot the actual Spirit is similar to that of the ‘shape’ in which Spirit
e o s itse in the religion—as, e.g., the incarnation of God
which occurs in oriental religion has no truth, because the
actua pirit of that religion is without this reconciliation. It
is inappropriate here to return from the totality of determina¬
tions to the individual ones, and to show in which ‘shape’ within
t e tota lty and its particular religion the others are contained
in t eir completeness. The higher form being placed under a
ower as ost its significance for self-consciousness, belongs to
U ° n y , SU P erficiall y an d to its picture-thought. It is to be con-
S1 f I 1 " m ltS P ro P er significance only where it is the principle
ot this particular religion and is upheld by its actual Spirit.


a. God as Light

685. Spirit as the essence that is self-consciousness —or the self-
conscious Being that is all truth and knows all reality as its
own se is, to begin with, only its Notion in contrast to the
A Ct ^ a ll y w hich it gives itselfin the movement ofits consciousness.

nd this Notion is, as contrasted with the daylight of this
exp lcit development, the night ofits essence; as contrasted with
the outer existence ofits moments as independent shapes, it is
the creative secret of its birth. This secret has its revelation
within itself; for the existence of its moments has its necessity
in this Notion, because this Notion is self-knowing Spirit and






NATURAL RELIGION


4 1 9


e (of e ^ as in its essence the moment of being
Aot P resentin g itself objectively.—This is the pure 1 , ^

and externalization has within itself as universal object t
in ,' y of its own self, or, in other words, this object is
f ain h e penetration of all thought and all reality. . 0 _

Aib- I n the immediate, first diremptionot sell-knowing ^
spirit its ‘shape’ has the determination which e ® jt s clf
Ute a di^ e cons ri°usness or to ^n^-certainty. Spirit be °
imrn u c f° rm king, though not of the non-spiritua ein -
! n ^.i^d w itb the contingent determinations of sensatio ’

0 that belongs to sense-certainty ;.on the contrary, lU . ,

bei f is filled with Spirit. It also includes the fortnjh.cn
1 a i n immediate self-consciousness , the form o 0

a PP f over against the self-consciousness that retreats r : s
This being which is filled with the Notion o k P* ^
V e th e ‘shape’ of the simple relation ol Spirit to itse , 0

* , erl ’ e ’ of ‘shapelessness’. In virtue of this determination,
( S , a £ e ’ is the pure, all-embracing and all-pervadmg ess ^

r hi of sunrise, which preserves itself in its formless su g
r v. ^ olberness is the equally simple negative, dar nei , un _
move^ en | S ofits own externalization, its creall< J nS in t heir
resist* 11 ^ element ol its otherness, are torrents of hg > .

• rtficity. they are at the same time the genesis o \

r' m ^lf and the return from the existence [ol its mo >

s of fire destructive of [all] structured form. 1M
r ^ rn ent of ] difference which it gives itself does, it 1S trU ’ • if
]T° t e unchecked in the substance of existence and s a P .

forms ofNature; yet the essential simplicity of its thought
° ps aimlessly about in it without stability or inte *g ’
enlarg es ' ts boun< fs tw the measureless, and its beauty,
to splendour, is dissolved in its sublimity.
ei fift7- The content developed by this pure being, or t eaC
f • perceiving, is, therefore, an essenceless by-play in t ‘
e which merely ascends, without descending into its P
to become a subject and through the self to consoh ate 1 s
tinct moments. The determinations of this substance a
attributes which do not attain to self-subsistence ut r ^
mprclv names of the many-named One. This On
with the manifold powers of existence and with the
reality as vv ^h an adornment that lacks a self, they



420 C. (CC.) RELIGION

messengers, having no will of their own, messengers of its might,
visions of its glory, voices in its praise.

688. However, this reeling, unconstrained Life must deter¬
mine itself as being-for-self and endow its vanishing shapes
with an enduring subsistence. The immediate being in which it
stands in antithesis to its consciousness is itself the negative power
which dissolves its distinctions. It is thus in truth the Self; and
Spirit therefore passes on to know itself in the form of self. Pure
Light disperses its unitary nature into an infinity of forms, and
offers up itself as a sacrifice to being-for-self, so that from its
substance the individual may take an enduring existence for
itself.


b. Plant and animal


689. Self-conscious Spirit that has withdrawn into itself from
the shapeless essence, or has raised its immediacy to self in
general, determines its unitary nature as a manifoldness o
being-for-self, and is the religion of spiritual perception. In this
it falls apart into the numberless multiplicity of weaker and
stronger, richer and poorer Spirits. This pantheism which, to
begin with, is the passive subsistence of these spiritual atoms
develops into a hostile movement within itself. The innocence
of the flower religion , which is merely the self-less idea of sell,
gives place to the earnestness of warring life, to the guilt of oni-
mal religions ; the passivity and impotence of contemplative in¬
dividuality pass into destructive being-for-self. It is of no use
to have taken from the things of perception the deadness of
abstraction, and to have raised them to beings of spiritual per¬
ception; the ensoulment of this kingdom of Spirits bears this
death within it owing to the determinateness and the negativity
which encroach upon the innocent indifference of plant life.
Through this negativity, the dispersion into the multiplicity of
passive plant forms becomes a hostile movement in which the


hatred which stems from being-for-self is aroused. The actual
self-consciousness of this dispersed Spirit is a host of separate,
antagonistic national Spirits who hate and fight each other to
the death and become conscious of specific forms of animals
as their essence; for they are nothing else than animal spirits,
animal lives which separate themselves off from one another
and are unconscious of their universality.


NATURAL RELIGION


421

690. In this hatred, however, the determinateness of purely
negative being-for-self consumes itself, and through this move¬
ment of the Notion Spirit enters into another shape. Superseded
being-for-self \s the form of the object , a form produced by the self,
or rather is the produced self, the self-consuming self, i.e. the
self that becomes a Thing. The artificer therefore retains the
upper hand over these mutually destructive animal spirits, and
his action is not merely negative, but tranquil and positive.
Spirit’s consciousness is thus now the movement which is above
and beyond the immediate in-itself as it is above and beyond
the abstract being-for-self. Since the in-itself is reduced,
through opposition, to being a determinateness, it is no longer
the proper form of absolute Spirit, but a reality which its con¬
sciousness finds confronting it as an ordinary existent thing, and
which it supersedes; at the same time, this consciousness is not
only this being-for-self which supersedes its object, but it also
produces its own idea, the being-for-self that is put forth in the
form of an object. This productive activity, however, is not a
perfect, but a conditioned, activity, the fashioning of a material
already to hand.


c. The artificer

69 l - Spirit, therefore, here appears, as an artificer , and its
action whereby it produces itself as object but without having
yet grasped the thought of itself is an instinctive operation, like
the building of a honeycomb by bees.

692. The first form, because it is immediate, is the abstract
form of the Understanding, and the work is not yet in its own
self filled with Spirit. The crystals of pyramids and obelisks,
simple combinations of straight lines with plane surfaces and
equal proportions of parts, in which the incommensurability
of the round is destroyed, these are the works of this artificer
of rigid form. On account of the merely abstract intelligibleness
of the form, the significance of the work is not in the work itself,
is not the spiritual self. Thus either the works receive Spirit into
them only as an alien, departed spirit that has forsaken its living
saturation with reality and, being itself dead, takes up its abode
in this lifeless crystal; or they have an external relation to Spirit
as something which is itself there externally and not as Spirit—



422 C. (CC.) RELIGION

they are related to it as to the dawning light, which casts its
significance on them.

^693. The division from which the artificer-spirit starts—the
in-itself which becomes the material it fashions, and the being-
for-seif which is the aspect of self-consciousness at work this
division has become objective to it in its work. Its further efforts
must aim at getting rid of this division of soul and body: to
clothe and give shape to soul in its own self, and to endow body
with soul. The two aspects, in being brought closer to each
other, retain the specific character of Spirit as ideally conceived
and as its enveloping husk; Spirit’s unity with itself contains
this antithesis of individuality and universality. Since the work,
in the coming-together of its aspects, comes closer to itself, this
at the same time produces another result, viz. that the work
comes closer to the self-consciousness performing it and that the
latter, in the work, comes to know itself as it is in its truth. But
in this way, the work at first constitutes only the abstract aspect
of the activity of Spirit, which does not yet know the content
of this activity within itself, but in its work, which is a Thing.
The artificer himself, Spirit in its entirety, has not yet appeared,
but is the still inner, hidden essence which, as an entirety, is
present only as divided into active self-consciousness and the
object it has produced.

694. The surrounding habitation, then, the outer reality
which has been raised at first only into the abstract form of the
Understanding, is fashioned by the artificer into a more lifelike
form. For this purpose he employs plant-life, which is no longer
sacred as it was to the earlier, impotent pantheism; on the con¬
trary, the artificer who grasps himself as the being that is for
itself , takes that plant life as something to be used and reduces
it to an outer aspect, to a mere ornament. But it is not used
unaltered; for the artificer of the self-conscious form at the same
time destroys the transitoriness inherent in the immediate exist¬
ence of this life and brings its organic forms nearer to the more
rigid and more universal forms of thought. The organic form
which, left to itself, proliferates unchecked in particularity,
being itself subjugated by the form of thought, in turn raises
these rectilinear flat shapes into a roundness more typical of
the organic form—a blending which becomes the root of free
architecture.


NATURAL RELIGION


423


695. This dwelling, the aspect of the universal element or in¬
organic nature of Spirit, now also includes within it a shape
of individuality which brings nearer to actuality the Spirit that
previously was separated from existence, and was external or
internal to it, and thereby makes the work more in harmony
with active self-consciousness. The artificer lays hold first of all
of the form of being-for-self in general, of the animal shape.
That he is no longer conscious of himself immediately in animal
life, he proves by constituting himself the productive power in
relation to it, and knows himself in it as in his work, whereby
the animal shape at the same time becomes superseded and the
hieroglyph of another meaning, of a thought. Consequently,
the shape, too, is no longer solely and entirely used by the artifi¬
cer, but is blended with the shape of thought, with the human
form. But the work still lacks the shape and outer reality in
which the self exists as self; it still does not in its own self pro¬
claim that it includes within it an inner meaning, it lacks
speech, the element in which the meaning filling it is itself
present. Therefore the work, even when it is wholly purged of
the animal element and wears only the shape of self-conscious¬
ness, is still the soundless shape which needs the rays of the rising
sun in order to have sound which, generated by light, is even
then merely noise and not speech, and reveals only an outer,
not the inner, self.

696. Over against this outer shape of the self stands the other
shape which proclaims its possession of an inner being. Nature,
withdrawing into its essence, deposes its living, self-particulariz¬
ing, self-entangling manifold existence to the level of an un¬
essential husk, which is the covering for the inner being ; and this
inner being is, in the first instance, still simple darkness, the
unmoved, the black, formless stone. [The Black Stone in the
Kaaba at Mecca.]

697. Both representations contain inwardness and outer ex¬
istence—the two moments of Spirit; and both representations
contain the two moments at once in an antithetical relation,
the self both as inner and as outer. The two have to be united.
The soul of the statue in human shape does not yet come forth
from the inner being, is not yet speech, the outer existence that
is in its own self inward; and the inner being of multiform exist¬
ence is still soundless, is not immanently differentiated and is


424


C. (CC.) RELIGION


still separated from its outer existence to which all differences
belong. The artificer therefore unites the two by blending the
natural and the self-conscious shape, and this ambiguous being
which is a riddle to itself, the conscious wrestling with the non-
conscious, the simple inner with the multiform outer, the dark¬
ness of thought mating with the clarity of utterance, these break
out into the language of a profound, but scarcely intelligible
wisdom.

698. In this work, there is an end of the instinctive effort
which produced the work that, in contrast to self-consciousness,
lacked consciousness; for in it, the activity of the artificer, which
constitutes self-consciousness, comes face to face with an equally
self-conscious, self-expressive inner being. In it he has worked
himself up to the point where his consciousness is divided
against itself, where Spirit meets Spirit. In this unity of self-
conscious Spirit with itself, in so far as it is the shape and the
object of its conscipusness, its blendings with the unconscious
shapes are purged of the immediate shapes of Nature. These
monsters in shape, word, and deed are dissolved into spiritual
shape: into an outer that has retreated into itself, and an inner
that utters or expresses itself out of itself and in its own self;
into thought which begets itself, which preserves its shape in
harmony with itself and is a lucid, intelligible existence. Spirit
is Artist. 5
