B. RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART

® 99 * Spirit has raised the shape in which it is present to its
own consciousness into the form of consciousness itself and it
produces such a shape for itself. The artificer has given up the
synthetic effort to blend the heterogeneous forms of thought and
natural objects; now that the shape has gained the form of self-
conscious activity, he has become a spiritual worker.

700. If we ask, which is the actual Spirit which has the con¬
sciousness of its absolute essence in the religion of art, we find
that it is the ethical or the true Spirit. This is not merely the uni¬
versal substance of all individuals; on the contrary, since this
substance has for actual consciousness the shape of consciousness
and it is individualized, it follows that the substance is known
by the individuals as their own essence and their own work.


RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART


425

It is for them neither the divine, essential Light in whose unity
the being-for-self of self-consciousness is contained only nega¬
tively, only transitorily, and in which it beholds the lord and
master of its actual world; nor is it the restless destruction of
hostile peoples, nor their subjection to a caste-system which
gives the semblance of organization of a completed whole, but
in which the universal freedom of the individuals is lacking.
On the contrary, this Spirit is the free nation in which hallowed
custom constitutes the substance of all, whose actuality and ex¬
istence each and everyone knows to be his own will and deed.

701. The religion of the ethical Spirit is, however, its eleva¬
tion above its real world, the withdrawal from its truth into
the pure knowledge of itself. Since the ethical nation lives in
immediate unity with its substance and lacks the principle of
the pure individuality of self-consciousness, the complete form
of its religion first appears as divorced from its existential shape
[Bestehen]. For the reality of the ethical substance rests partly
on its passive unchangeableness as contrasted with the absolute
movement of self-consciousness, and consequently on the fact
that this self-consciousness has not yet withdrawn into itself
from its contented acceptance of custom and its firm trust
therein. Partly, too, on its organization into a multiplicity of
rights and duties, as also on its distribution into the spheres of
the various classes and their particular activities which co-oper¬
ate to form the whole; and hence on the fact that the individual
is content with the limitation of his existence and has not yet
grasped the unrestricted thought of his free self. But that tran¬
quil immediate trust in the substance turns back into trust in one¬
self and into the certainty of oneself; and the multiplicity of
rights and duties, like the restricted activity, is the same dialecti¬
cal movement of the ethical sphere as the multiplicity of things
and their specific natures—a movement which finds its rest and
stability only in the simplicity of the Spirit that is certain of
itself. The consummation of the ethical sphere in free self-con¬
sciousness, and the fate of the ethical world, are therefore the
individuality that has withdrawn into itself, the absolute levity
of the ethical Spirit which has dissolved within itself all the
firmly established distinctions of its stable existence and the
spheres of its orgahicallv ordered world and, being perfectly
sure of itself, has attained to unrestrained joyfulness and the



426


C. (CC.) RELIGION


freest enjoyment of itself. This simple certainty of Spirit within
itself has a twofold meaning: it is a serene, stable existence and
settled truth, and also absolute unrest and the passing-away of
the ethical order. But it changes round into the latter; for the
truth of the ethical Spirit is, in the first instance, still only this
substantial essence and trust in it, in which the self does not
know itself as a free individuality, and which, therefore, in this
inwardness, or in the liberation of the self, perishes. Since, then,
its trust is broken, and the substance of the nation bruised,
Spirit, which hitherto mediated the unstable extremes, has now
stepped forth as an extreme, that of self-consciousness grasping
itself as essence. This is Spirit, inwardly sure of itself, which
mourns over the loss of its world, and now out of the purity
of self creates its own essence which is raised above the real
world.

702. In such an epoch, absolute art makes its appearance.
Prior to this it is an instinctive fashioning of material; sub¬
merged in the world of determinate being, it works its way out
of it and into it; it does not possess its substance in the free ethi¬
cal sphere, and therefore does not have the character of free
spiritual activity for the self at work. Later on, Spirit transcends
art in order to gain a higher representation of itself, viz. to be
not merely the substance born of the self, but to be, in its repre¬
sentation as object, this self \ not only to give birth to itself from
its Notion, but to have its very Notion for its shape, so that the
Notion and the work of art produced know each other as one
and the same.

7 ° 3 * The ethical substance having withdrawn from its outer
existence back into its pure self-consciousness, this is the aspect
of the Notion or of the activity with which Spirit brings itself
forth as object. This activity is pure form, because the indivi¬
dual, in ethical obedience and service, has worked off every un¬
conscious existence and fixed determination in the same way
that substance itself has become this fluid essence. This form
is the night in which substance was betrayed and made itself
into Subject. It is out of this night of pure certainty of self that
the ethical Spirit is resurrected as a shape freed from Nature
and its own immediate existence.

704. The concrete existence of the pure Notion into which
Spirit has fled from its body is an individual which Spirit selects


RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART 42?

to be the vessel of its sorrow. Spirit is present in this individual
as his universal and as the power over him from which he suffers
violence, as his ‘pathos’, by giving himself over to which his
self-consciousness loses its freedom. But that positive power of
universality is subdued by the pure self of the individual, the
negative power. This pure activity, conscious of its inalienable
strength, wrestles with the shapeless essence. Becoming its
master, it has made the ‘pathos’ into its material and given itself
its content, and this unity emerges as a work, universal Spirit
individualized and set before us.

a. The abstract work of art

7 ° 5 - The first work of art, as immediate, is abstract and in¬
dividual. As for itself, it has to move away from this immediate
and objective mode towards self-consciousness, while self-con¬
sciousness, on the other hand, in the cult aims at getting rid
of the distinction by which it distinguishes itself at first from
its Spirit, and by so doing to produce a work of art which is
in its own self animate.

706. The first mode in which the artistic spirit keeps its shape
and its active consciousness farthest apart is the immediate
mode, viz. the shape is there or is immediately present simply as
a thing. In this mode, the shape is broken up into the distinction
of individuality, which bears within it the shape of the self, and
of universality, which represents the inorganic essence in
reference to the shape, its environment and habitation. This
shape, through the raising of the whole into the pure Notion,
acquires its pure, spiritually appropriate form. It is neither the
crystal, the form characteristic of the Understanding, which
houses the dead or is illumined by a soul outside of it, nor is
it that blending of the forms of Nature and of thought which
first emerged from the plant, thought’s activity in this being
still an imitation. On the contrary, the Notion strips off the traces
of root, branches, and leaves still adhering to the forms and
purifies the latter into shapes in which the crystal’s straight lines
and flat surfaces are raised into incommensurable ratios, so that
the ensoulment of the organic is taken up into the abstract form
of the Understanding and, at the same time, its essential
nature—incommensurability—is preserved for the Under¬
standing.


428


c. (CC.) RELIGION

707. But the indwelling god is the Black Stone drawn forth
from its animal covering and pervaded with the light o c ° n
sciousness. The human form strips off the animal shape wit
which it was blended; the animal is for the god merely an acci
dental guise; it steps alongside its true shape and no longer as
any worth on its own account, but is reduced to signifying some
thing else and has sunk to the level of a mere symbol, y t is
very fact, the shape of the god in its own self strips off a so t e
poverty of the natural conditions of animal existence, and mts
at the internal dispositions of animal life melted into its surface
and belonging only to this surface. The essential being of t e
god is, however, the unity of the universal existence of Nature
and of self-conscious Spirit which, in its actuality, confronts t e
former. At the same time, being in the first instance an individual
shape, its existence is one of the elements of Nature, just as its
self-conscious actuality is an individual national Spirit. But the
former is, in this unity, that element reflected into Spirit,
Nature transfigured by thought and united with self-conscious
life. The form of the gods has, therefore, its Nature-element
within it as a transcended moment, as a dim memory. The
chaotic being and confused strife of the freely existing elements,
the unethical realm of the Titans, is conquered and banished
to the fringes of an actuality that has become transparent to
itself, to the obscure boundaries of the world which finds itself
in [the sphere of] Spirit and is there at peace. These ancient
gods, first-born children of the union of Light with Darkness,
Heaven, Earth, Ocean, Sun, the Earth’s blind typhonic Fire,
and so on, are supplanted by shapes which only dimly recall
those Titans, and which are no longer creatures of Nature, but
lucid, ethical Spirits of self-conscious nations.

708. This simple shape has thus rid itself of the unrest of end¬
less individuation, both of its Nature-element which, only qua
universal essence, is ruled by necessity, but in its existence and
activity is open to contingency; and of the nation which, dis¬
persed into particular spheres of activity and individual centres
of self-consciousness, has an existence which is manifold in
meaning and activity. All this individuation has been got rid
of by this simple form and brought together into an individu¬
ality that is at rest. This individuality is, therefore, confronted
by the moment of unrest, it—the essence —is confronted by self-


4 2 9


religionintheformofart

r ,hich as the birthplace of that unrest, nothing
consciousness for whi ’ aclivily . What belongs to the substance 5
remams except to r ^ his work> but t0 himself as a particular
the artist gave ent y ^ work n0 actual existence: he could
individuality he g ^ work only by emptying himself of his
impart f rfec ‘'° rsona lizing himself and rising to the abstrac-
particulanty.aep ^ thfa first , m mediate production, the
tion of pure acti • ^ his self-conscious activity is not yet
separation of the The wor k by itself is not, therefore, actu-
restored to their u > ^ a whole only together with its genesis
ally an inspired ’ jn a wor k of art, viz. that it is produced
The common el made by human hands, is the moment

m consciousness qu a Notion, which stands in contrast to
of the Notion ex »J otio n, whether in the shape of artist or

the work. AndI enough t0 declare the work of art to be

spectator, is u . inspired, and to forget himself as per-

in its own self a then against this we must stick to the

former or as sp cannot dispense with the moment of

Notion of Spirit This momen t, however, stands con-

being conscious:o bec ause in this initial duality of itself

trasted with t ^ their abstra ct, contrasted characters

Spirit gives the ^ Th j ng , and their return into the unity
of action and of Q Ceed ed has not yet come about,
from which the y P learns ; n b j s work tbat be d i d not pro .

709. The-artis , ’ From it ; s true, tbere comes back

duce a being 1 $$ ; n tbe sense that an admiring crowd

to him a consc, . which ; s t heir own essence. But this in-
reveres it as t e ^ (0 him his self-consciousness only as
spiration, since 1 con f ess i on to the artist that the inspired

admiration, is ra ^ j eve i as himself. Since his work comes

work is not on j 0 yfulness, he does not find therein the

back to him simp mak j n g himself into an artist, and of creation,
painful labour 0 0 f his work. Furthermore, the crowd

nor the strain an ^ br j ng j t offerings, endue .it with their

may judge tie w hatever way it may be: if they with their

own consciousne es aboye he knows how much more

knowledge se understand and say; if they put them-

his act is t inn w n j ze in it the essence which dominates

seJves below >» and r ^ e f f as the master of this being,
them, ^||”^ ork 0 f art therefore demands another element of



430


G. (CC.) RELIGION


its existence, the god another mode of coming forth than this,
in which, out of the depths of his creative night, he descends
into the opposite, into externality, into the determination of the
Thing which lacks self-consciousness. This higher element is
Language—an outer reality that is immediately self-conscious
existence. Just as the individual self-consciousness is immediately
present in language, so it is also immediately present as a uni¬
versal infection; the complete separation into independent selves
is at the same time the fluidity and the universally communi¬
cated unity of the many selves; language is the soul existing
as soul. The god, therefore, who has language for the element
of his shape is the work of art that is in its own self inspired,
that possesses immediately in its outer existence the pure
activity which, when it existed as a Thing, was in contrast to
it. In other words, self-consciousness, in the objectification of
its essence, abides immediately with itself. Abiding thus with
itself in its essence, it is pure thought , or the devotion whose inward¬
ness in the hymn has at the same time an outer existence. It
retains within itself the individuality of self-consciousness, and
this individuality is at the same time heard as a universal indivi¬
duality that is immediately present. Devotion, kindled in the
manifold units of self-consciousness, is conscious of its act as the
act of all alike and as simple being. Spirit, as this universal self-
consciousness of all, has its pure inwardness, no less than the
being-for-others and the being-for-self of the individuals, in a
single unity.

711. This language is distinct from another language of the
god which is not that of universal self-consciousness. The Oracle ,
both of the god of the religions of art and of the preceding reli¬
gions, is the necessary, first form of the god’s utterance; for the
Notion of the god implies that he is the essence of both Nature
and Spirit, and therefore has not only natural but spiritual ex¬
istence as well. In so far as this moment is at first merely implied
in his Notion and not yet realized in religion, the language is,
for the religious self-consciousness, the language of an alien self-
consciousness. The self-consciousness that is still alien to its com¬
munity is not yet immediately present in the manner demanded
by its Notion. The self is simple or unitary, and thereby abso¬
lutely universal being-for-self ; but the self that is separated from
the self-consciousness of the community is at first only an indivi-


RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART


43 1


dual self. The content of this its own and individual language
stems from the universal determinateness in which absolute
Spirit in general is posited in its religion. Thus the universal
Spirit of the Sunrise which has not yet particularized its exist¬
ence utters equally simple and universal statements about the
divine Being, the substantial content of which is sublime in its
simple truth, but on account of this universality at the same
time appears trivial to the progressively developing self-con¬
sciousness.

712. The further developed self which rises to become a
being-for-self is master over the pure ‘pathos’ of substance, over
the objectivity of the Light of Sunrise, and knows that simplicity
of truth as essential being which does not have the form of contin¬
gent existence through an alien speech, knows it as the sure and
unwritten law of the gods , a law that is ‘everlasting and no one knows
whence it came '. 1 Just as the universal truth which was revealed
by the divine Light has here withdrawn into the inner or nether
world of being, and is thus freed from the form of contingent
existence, so, on the other hand, in the religion of art because
the shape of the god has taken on consciousness and hence in¬
dividuality in general, the utterance peculiar to the god who
is the Spirit of an ethical nation is the Oracle, which knows
its particular affairs and what is advantageous concerning
them. The universal truths, however, because they are known
as that which possesses essential being are claimed by conscious
thought for itself, and their speech is no longer alien to it but
is its own. Just as that wise man of old 2 searched in his own
thought for what was good and beautiful, but left it to his ‘dae¬
mon’ to know the petty contingent content of what he wanted
to know—whether it would be good for him to keep company
with this or that person, or good for one of his acquaintances
to go on a journey, and similar unimportant things; in the same
way the universal consciousness draws knowledge of the contin¬
gent from birds, or trees, or the yeasty earth, the vapour from
which deprives self-consciousness of its self-possession. For the
contingent is something that is not self-possessed and is alien,
and therefore the ethical consciousness lets itself settle such mat¬
ters too, as by a throw of the dice, in an unthinking and alien

Sophocles, Antigone.

2 Socrates.



432


C. (CC.) RELIGION


manner. When the individual, by using his understanding,
makes up his mind, and after deliberation chooses what is
advantageous for him, this self-determination is based on the
specific nature of his particular character. This latter is itself
contingent, and therefore knowledge supplied by the under¬
standing as to what is advantageous for the individual is just
such a knowledge as that of the oracles or of the ‘lot’; only that
he who questions the oracle or ‘lot’ thereby expresses the ethical
sentiment of indifference to what is contingent, while the
former, on the other hand, treats what is intrinsically contin¬
gent as an important concern of his thinking and knowing.
What is higher than both, however, is not only to make
deliberation the Oracle for a contingent action but, in addition,
to know that this deliberate action is itself something contingent
on account of its connection with the particular aspect of the
action and of its advantageousness.

713. The true self-conscious existence which Spirit receives
in speech which is not the utterance of an alien, and therefore
contingent, not universal, self-consciousness, is the work of art
we met with before. It stands in contrast to the Thing-like
character of the statue. Whereas this exists at rest, speech is a
vanishing existence; and whereas in the statue the liberated
objectivity lacks an immediate self of its own, in speech, on the
other hand, objectivity remains too much shut up within the
self, falls short of attaining a lasting shape and is, like Time, no
longer immediately present in the very moment of its being
present.

7 H- The movement of the two sides constitutes the Cult:
a movement in which the divine shape in motion in the pure
eeling element of self-consciousness, and the divine shape at
rest in the element of thinghood, mutually surrender their dis¬
tinctive characters, and the unity which is the Notion of their
essence achieves an existence. In the Cult, the self gives itself
the consciousness of the divine Being descending to it from its
remoteness, and this divine Being, which formerly was not
actual but only an object over against it, through this act
receives the actuality proper to self-consciousness.

7 ! 5 * This Notion of the Cult is already implicitly contained
and present in the stream of sacred song. This devotion is the
immediate, pure satisfaction of the self by and within itself. It


RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART


433


is the purified soul which, in this purity, is directly only essence
and is one with essence. The soul, because of its abstract charac¬
ter, is not consciousness which distinguishes its object from
itself; it is thus only the night of its existence and the place pre¬
pared for its [outer] shape. The abstract Cult therefore raises
the self into being this pure divine element. The soul perfects
this purification with consciousness. Yet it is still not the self
that has descended into its depths and knows itself as evil; but
it is something that only immediately is, a soul that cleanses its
exterior by washing it, and puts on white robes, while its inward
being traverses the imaginatively conceived path of works,
punishments, and rewards, the path of spiritual training in
general, i.e. of ridding itself of its particularity, as a result of
which it reaches the dwellings and the community of the blest.

716. This Cult is, at first, only a secret fulfilment, i.e. a fulfil¬
ment only in imagination, not in actuality. It must be an actual
deed,for a deed thatis not actual isself-contradictory. Conscious¬
ness proper thereby raises itself into its pure self-consciousness.
The divine Being has in this the meaning of a free object;
through the actual Cult, this object returns into the self; and
in so far as it has, in pure consciousness, the meaning of the
pure divine Being dwelling beyond reality, this Being descends
from its universality, through the mediation of the Cult, into
individuality, and thus unites itself with reality.

717. The way the two sides enter into the act is determined
as follows: for the self-conscious aspect, so far as it is actual con¬
sciousness, the divine Being presents itself as actual Nature ; on
the one hand, Nature belongs to consciousness as its possession
and property, and has the value of an existence that has no
being of its own. On the other hand, Nature is consciousness’s
own immediate actuality and* individuality, which equally is
regarded as a non-essential being and is stripped of its apparent
independence. But for its pure consciousness, this external
Nature has at the same time the opposite meaning, viz. of being
the implicitly divine Being, for which the self sacrifices its un¬
essential being, just as, conversely, it sacrifices the unessential
aspect of Nature to itself. This makes the act a spiritual move¬
ment, because it is this twofold process, on the one hand, of
superseding the abstraction of the divine Being (which is how
devotion determines its object) and making it actual, and, on



434


C. (CC.) RELIGION

the other hand, of superseding the actual (which is how the
doer determines the object and himself) and raising it into a
universality.

718. The act of the Cult itself begins, therefore, with the pure
surrender of a possession which the owner, apparently without
any profit whatever to himself, pours away or lets rise up in
smoke. In so doing, he renounces before the essence of his pure
consciousness all possession and right of the property and
enjoyment thereof, renounces [his] personality and the return
ofhis act into himself; and he reflects the act into the universal,
or into the divine Being, rather than into himself. Conversely,
however, the divine Being in its immediacy also perishes in this
act. The animal sacrificed is the symbol of a god ; the fruits con¬
sumed are the living Ceres and Bacchus themselves. In the
former, die the powers of the upper law which has blood and
actual life, in the latter, the powers of the lower law that pos¬
sesses in bloodless form secret and cunning power. The sacrifice
of the divine substance, in so far as it is an act , belongs to the
self-conscious aspect; that this actual deed be possible, the
divine Being must already have sacrificed itself in principle. This
it has done by giving itself an [outer] existence and has made
itse f into an individual animal and into fruit. This renun¬
ciation therefore, which the divine Being has already
accomplished in principle, is shown forth by the self who performs
the sacrifice as an existent fact and for his own consciousness,
thus replying that immediate actuality of the divine Being by
the higher actuality, viz. that of himself. For the unity which
as resulted from overcoming the singleness and separation of
the two sides is not merely a negative fate, but has a positive
sigm cance. It is only to the abstract being of the underworld
t at t e sacrificial offering is wholly surrendered, and thus the
re ection of possessions and being-for-self into the universal is
istinguished from the self as such. At the same time, however,

\ 1S * S ° n y a sma ll part, and the other act of sacrifice is merely
t e estruction of what cannot be used, and is really the pre¬
paration of the offering for a meal, the feast that cheats the act
out o its negative significance. At that first sacrifice, the person
ma mg the offering reserves the greatest share for his own
enjoyment, and from the latter sacrifice, what is useful, for the
same purpose. This enjoyment is the negative power which puts


RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART


435


an end both to the divine Being and to the singleness, and it
is at the same time the positive actuality in which the objective
existence of the divine Being is transformed into self-conscious
existence, and the self has consciousness of its unity with the
divine Being.

719. For the rest, though this Cult is in fact an act, its mean¬
ing yet lies mostly in devotion. What belongs to devotion is not
objectively produced, just as the result, in the enjoyment [of
the feast], is itself robbed of its outer existence. The Cult, there¬
fore, goes further and replaces this defect, in the first instance
by giving its devotion an enduring objective existence, since the
Cult is the common task—or the individual task for each and
all to do—which produces a dwelling and adornments for the
glory of the god. By so doing, in part the objectivity of the statue
is transcended; for by this dedication of his gifts and labours
the labourer inclines the god to look favourably upon him, and
contemplates his self as belonging to the god. In part, too, this
action is not the individual labour of the artist, this particular
aspect of it being dissolved in universality. But it is not only
the glory of the god that is accomplished, and the blessing of
his favour shed on the labourer only ideally and in imagination :
the work has also a meaning the reverse of the first, which was
that of alienating and glorifying something alien. The dwell¬
ings and halls of the god are for the use of man, the treasures
preserved therein are his own in case of need; the honour and
glory enjoyed by the god in his adornment are the honour and
glory of the nation, great in soul and in artistic achievement.
At the festival, this people adorns its own dwellings and
garments, no less than the things of the god, with graceful
decorations. In this way, they receive from the grateful god a
return for their gifts and proofs of his favour, in which through
their work they became united with him, not as a hope and
in a future realization, but rather, in witnessing to his glory
and in bringing him gifts, the nation has the immediate
enjoyment of its own wealth and adornment.

b. The living work of art

720. The nation that approaches its god in the Cult of the
religion of art is the ethical nation that knows its state and the
actions of the state to be the will and the achievement of its



43 ^


C. (CC.) RELIGION

own self. This Spirit, confronting the self-conscious nation is,
therefore, not the divine Light which, being devoid of a self,
does not contain within it the self-certainty of the individuals,
but is only their universal essence and the lordly power in which
they disappear. The Cult of the religion of this simple, amor¬
phous essence gives back to its votaries, therefore, in general
merely this: that they are the people of their god, who secures
for them only their enduring existence and their substance as
such; not, however, their actual self which, on the contrary,
is rejected. For they reverence their god as the empty Depth,
not as Spirit. But the Cult of the religion of art, on the other
hand, is without that abstract simplicity of the essence and there¬
fore of its depth. That essence, however, which is immediately
united with the self is in itself Spw'tf. and the truth that is a knowing ,
though still not the truth that is known, or the truth that knows
itself in the depths of its nature. Because, then, the essence here
contains a self, its manifestation is well disposed towards con¬
sciousness; and, in the Cult, consciousness receives not only the
general sanction of its enduring existence, but also its conscious
existence in the Cult itself; just as. conversely, the essence does
not have an actuality devoid of self, in a rejected people whose
substance merely is acknowledged, but in the people whose self
is acknowledged in its substance.

721. Self-consciousness, then, comes forth from the Cult
satisfied in its essence, and the god enters into it as into its habita¬
tion. This habitation is, by itself, the night of Substance or its
pure individuality, but no longer the tense individuality of the
artist, an individuality which has not yet reconciled itself with
its essence that is in process of becoming objective ; it is the
satisfied night [of substance] which has its ‘pathos’ within
it and is not in need of anything, because it returns from
intuition, from the objectivity that has been superseded.

This pathos’ is, by itself, the Being of the risen Sun, but
a Being which has now ‘set’ within itself, and has its ‘setting’
or going-down, i.e. self-consciousness—and hence existence and
actuality—within itself. It has here traversed the movement of
its actualization. Coming down from its pure essential nature
and becoming an objective force of Nature and the expressions
of that force, it is an outer existence for the ‘other’, for the self
by which it is consumed. The silent essence of self-less Nature


RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART


437


in its fruits attains to that stage where, self-prepared and
digested, it offers itself to life that has a self-like nature. In its
usefulness as food and drink it reaches its highest perfection;
for in this it is the possibility of a higher existence and comes
into contact with spiritual reality. In its metamorphosis, the
Earth-Spirit has developed, partly into a silently energizing
Substance, partly into a spiritual fermentation: in the first case
it is the feminine principle of nourishment, in the other the
masculine principle, the self-impelling force of self-conscious ex¬
istence.

722. In this enjoyment, then, is revealed what that divine
risen Light really is; enjoyment is the mystery of its being. For
the mystical is not concealment of a secret, or ignorance, but
consists in the self knowing itself to be one with the divine Being
and that this, therefore, is revealed. Only the self is manifest to
itself; or what is manifest is so, only in the immediate certainty
of itself. But it is in this immediate certainty that the simple
divine Being has been placed by the Cult; as a thing that can
be used it not only has an existence that is seen, felt, smelt,
tasted, but it is also an object of desire, and by being actually
enjoyed becomes one with the self and thereby completely
revealed to the self and manifest to it. That which is said to
be manifest to Reason, to the heart, is in fact still secret, for
it still lacks the actual certainty of immediate existence, both
the certainty of objectivity and the certainty belonging to
enjoyment, a certainty which in religion, however, is not merely
immediate and unthinking, but is at the same time purely the
certainty that is known by the self.

723. What has thus, through the Cult, become manifest to
self-conscious Spirit within itself, is simple essence as the move¬
ment, partly out of its dark night of concealment up into con¬
sciousness, there to be its silently nourishing substance; but no
less, however, the movement of again losing itself in the nether
darkness, and lingering above only with a silent maternal
yearning. The moving impulse is, however, nothing but the
many-named divine Light of the risen Sun and its undisciplined
tumultuous life which, similarly let go from its [merely] abstract
Being, at first enters into the objective existence of the fruit,
and then, surrendering itself to self-consciousness, in it attains
to genuine reality—and now roams about as a crowd of frenzied


438 C. (CC.) RELIGION

females, the untamed revelry of Nature in self-conscious
form.

724. But what is disclosed to consciousness is still only abso¬
lute [i.e. abstract] Spirit, which is this simple essence, not Spirit
as it is in its own self; in other words, it is only immediate Spirit,
the Spirit of Nature. Consequently, its self-conscious life is only
the mystery of bread and wine, of Ceres and of Bacchus, not
of the other, the strictly higher, gods whose individuality in¬
cludes as an essential moment self-consciousness as such. There¬
fore, Spirit has not yet sacrificed itself as self-conscious Spirit to
self-consciousness, and the mystery of bread and wine is not yet
the mystery of flesh and blood.

725. This undisciplined revelry of the god must bring itself
to rest as an object, and the enthusiasm which did not attain
to consciousness must produce a work that confronts it, as in
the previous case the statue confronts the artist; as a work,
moreover, that is equally complete, but not, however, as an in¬
trinsically lifeless, but as a living, self. Such a Cult is the festival
which man celebrates in his own honour, though not yet
imparting to that Cult the significance of the absolute Being;
for it is essence that is manifest to him at first, not yet Spirit;
not as something that essentially takes on human form. But this
Cult lays the foundation for this revelation and unfolds its
moments separately. Thus here we have the abstract moment
of the living corporeality of essence, just as previously we had the
unity of both in an unconscious revelry. Man thus puts himself
in the place of the statue as the shape that has been raised and
fashioned for perfectly free movement, just as the statue is per¬
fectly free repose. Although each individual knows how to play
t e part of at least a torch-bearer, one of them comes forward
w o is the patterned movement, the smooth elaboration and

uent energy of all the participants. He is an inspired and living
wor o art that matches strength with its beauty; and on him
1S , es ^°^ ec ^ as a re ward for his strength, the decoration with
W i 1C V e , Statue was honoured, and the honour of being, in
p ace ° t e god in stone, the highest bodily representation
among his people of their essence.

726. In both representations which have just come before
us t ere is present the unity of self-consciousness and spiritual
essence, but they are still not equally balanced against each


RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART 439

other. In the Bacchic enthusiasm it is the self that is beside itself,
but in corporeal beauty it is spiritual essence. The stupor of
consciousness and its wild stammering utterance in the former
case must be taken up into the clear existence of the latter, and
the non-spiritual clarity of the latter into the inwardness of
the former. The perfect element in which inwardness is just as
external as externality is inward is once again speech; but it
is neither the speech of the Oracle, wholly contingent and in¬
dividual as regards its content, nor the emotional hymn sung
in praise of the individual god, nor again is it the meaningless
stammer of Bacchic frenzy. On the contrary, it has gained a
lucid and universal content: a content that is lucid , because the
artist has worked his way out of the initial enthusiasm, originat¬
ing wholly from substance, into a [definite] shape. This shape
is his own existence which, in all its stirrings and impulses, is
permeated and accompanied by self-conscious soul; and the
content is universal, for in this festival which honours man there
vanishes the one-sidedness of the statues which contain only a
national Spirit, a specific character of the divine nature. The
handsome warrior is indeed the glory of his particular nation,
but he is a corporeal individuality in which are swallowed up
the fulness and seriousness of meaning and the inner character
of the Spirit which bears the particular life, the demands, the
needs, and customs of his nation. In this kenosis, this external-
ization of itself, into complete corporeality, Spirit has laid aside
the special influences and sympathies of Nature which, as the
Spirit of the nation, it contained shut up within it. Its nation
is, therefore, no longer conscious in this Spirit of its particularity
but rather of having laid this aside, and is conscious of the uni¬
versality of its human existence.

c. The spiritual work of art

727. The national Spirits which become conscious of their
essence in the shape of a particular animal coalesce into a single
Spirit. Thus it is that the separate beautiful national Spirits
unite into a single pantheon, the element and habitation of
which is language. The pure intuition of itself as universal
humanity has, in the actuality of the national Spirit, this form:
the national Spirit combines with the others with which it con¬
stitutes through Nature a single nation, in a common undertak-


440


C. (CC.) RELIGION

ing, and for this task forms a collective nation and therewith
a collective Heaven. This universality to which Spirit in its ex¬
istence attains, is, however, only this first universality which
first issues from the individuality of the ethical sphere, which
has not yet overcome its immediacy, has not yet formed a single
State out of its peoples. The ethical life of the actual national
Spirit rests partly on the immediate trust of the individuals in
their nation as a whole, partly on the direct share which all,
regardless of differences of class, take in the decisions and
actions of the government. In the union which, to begin with,
is not a permanent arrangement but only for the purpose of a
common action, that freedom of participation by each and all
is, for the time being , put on one side. This first alliance is, there¬
fore, more an assembly of individualities than their domination
by an abstract thought which would rob the individuals of their
self-conscious participation in the will and deed of the State.

728. The assembly of national Spirits constitutes a circle of
shapes which now embraces the whole of Nature as well as the
whole ethical world. They stand, too, under the supreme com¬
mand of the one, rather than under his sovereignty. By themselves,
they are the universal substances of what the self-conscious
essence in itself \s and does. This, however, constitutes the power
and, in the first instance, the centre at least with which those
universal beings are concerned, and which at first seems to
merge their affairs only contingently. But it is the return of the
divine Being into self-consciousness that already contains the
reason why self-consciousness forms the centre for those divine
powers and conceals their unity, to begin with, under the form
of a friendly, external connection of the two worlds.

729. The same universality which belongs to this content
attaches necessarily also to the form of consciousness in which
the content appears. It is no longer the actual practice of the
Cult, but a practice that is raised, not yet indeed into the
Notion, but at first into picture-thinking , into the synthetic link¬
ing-together of self-conscious and external existence. The
external existence of this picture-thinking, language , is the
earliest language, the Epic as such, which contains the universal
content of the world, universal at least in the sense of complete¬
ness , though not indeed as the universality of thought. The
Minstrel is the individual and actual Spirit from whom, as a


RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART 441

subject of this world, it [the world] is produced and by whom
it is borne. His ‘pathos’ is not the stupefying power of Nature
but Mnemosyne, recollection and a gradually developed in¬
wardness, the remembrance of essence that formerly was
directly present. He is the organ that vanishes in its content;
what counts is not his own self but his Muse, his universal song.
What, however, is in fact present is the syllogism in which the
extreme of universality, the world of the gods, is linked with
individuality, with the Minstrel, through the middle term of
particularity. The middle term is the nation in its heroes, who
are individual men like the Minstrel, but presented only in idea,
and are thereby at the same time universal , like the free extreme
of universality, the gods.

730. In this Epic, then, there is in general presented to con¬
sciousness what is implicitly accomplished in the Cult, the rela¬
tion of the divine to the human. The content is an action of the
self-conscious essence. The acting disturbs the tranquillity of the
Substance and excites the essence so that its simple, unitary
nature is divided and opened up into the manifold world of
natural and ethical powers. The action is the violation of the
peaceful earth, the trench which, animated by blood, evokes
the departed spirits and these, thirsting for life, receive it in the
action of self-consciousness. The business which is the object
of these general exertions has two sides: the side of the self , by
which the business is accomplished by a totality of actual
nations and the individualities standing at their head; and the
side of the universal , by which it is accomplished by their sub¬
stantial powers. Formerly, however, the relation of the two bore
the character of a synthetic combination of the universal and
the individual, i.e. of picture-thinking. On this specific charac¬
ter depends the appraisal of this world. The relation of the two
is thus a mingling of them which inconsistently divides and
apportions the unity of the action, and superfluously throws the
action over from one side to the other. The universal powers
have the form of individuality and hence the principle of action
in them; what they effect appears, therefore, to proceed entirely
from them and to be as free an action as that of men. Con¬
sequently, both gods and men have done one and the same
thing. The earnestness of those divine powers is a ridiculous
superfluity, since they are in fact the power or strength of the



442


C. (CC.) RELIGION

individuality performing the action; while the exertions and
labour of the latter is an equally useless effort, since it is rat er
the gods who manage everything. Ephemeral mortals w o are
as nothing are at the same time the mighty self that brings into
subjection the universal Beings, offends the gods, an , in
general, procures for them an actual existence and an interes
in acting. Just as, conversely, these impotent universa eings
who nourish themselves on the gifts of men and through t cm
alone get something to do, are the natural substance an t e
material of all events, and are equally the ethical matter an
the ‘pathos’ of action. If their elemental natures are rs
brought into actual existence and into an active relations ip
by the free self of individuality, they are no less the universa
that withdraws itself from this connection, that remains un
restricted in its own specific character, and through the in
vincible elasticity of its unity effaces the atomistic singleness o
the doer and his constructions, preserves itself in its purity an
dissolves everything individual in its fluid nature.

731. Just as the gods fall into a contradictory relation wit
the !self-like nature opposed to them, so too their universality
comes into conflict with their own specific character and its
relationship to others. They are the eternal, beautiful indivi¬
duals who, serene in their own existence, are exempt from trans¬
itoriness and the influence of alien powers. But they are at the
same time specific elements, particular gods, which therefore stand
in relation to others. But that relation to others which, in virtue
of the opposition involved in it, is a conflict with them, is a comi¬
cal self-forgetfulness of their eternal nature. Determinateness
is rooted in their divine existence and possesses in its limitation
the independence of the whole indiv iduality; through this their
characters at once lose the sharpness of their peculiar disposi¬
tion and blend together in their ambiguity. One purpose of the
activity—and their activity itself—since it is directed against
an other , and hence against an invincible divine power, is an
arbitrary showing-off which at once melts away and transforms
the apparent earnestness of the action into a harmless, self-con¬
fident play, without result or outcome. If, however, in the
nature of their divinity, the negative element or the specific
determinateness of that nature appears merely as the inconsis¬
tency of their activity and as the contradiction between purpose



' ar t


, 6U 0 , 0 ...KT„ Et

and result, and if that independent a * u ,

ponderance over the element of deter^^ce ret •

very fact the pure power of the negat-^'ttateness a ' ns the pre

over, as the ultimate power ov er j t c °nfronts L Cn by that
do nothing. They are the univ ersa , d a gai nst wh"u more ’
against the individual self of mortal*’, a , n . d the Dn9 :' C U can
against their might; but the univ ersa , lctl cannot hol’d
hovers over them and over this whol e ^ for that ° Ut

to which the entire content bel 0 n gs ' d °fpict ure S*’
Necessity a mere happening wh ^ * the irra,i ona , vo f d „ g f
without a self and sorrowfully, |, lr th J*> ntus, f ace „™,,"'
not find themselves in this purity, €terr ninate natures c an

732. This Necessity, however, is th e •
brings under control the contradictory 2 ° f,h « Notion which
separate moments, a unity in which the j n Stantial being of the
trariness of their action is orderly disp 0se . Consi stency and arbi-
actions receives its earnestness and w fth ,i,’ ant * l he plav of their
selves. The content of the world ofpj£*» the aetioL then!!
folds itself in the middle term on its ow n ac thou S ht freely un¬
round the individuality of a hero wh 0 n C ° Unt > gathering itself
and beauty feels his life is broken and Wever > m his strength
early death. For the individuality t h at is rowful *Y awaits an
lished and actual is banished to its extr ^ tse ^ ^rmly estab-

moments which have not yet found and 3nd mto

one individual moment, the abstract*'^ themselves. The

Necessity, which shares in the life of tf, n °, n ' ac tual one, is

little as does the other, the actual individu 1 dd ' e term just as

keeps himself outside of it and is lost in jp ’ Minstrel, who

extremes must draw nearer to the corn ^ er ^ orrnance - Both

Necessity, has to fill itself with the content?’ ° ne ° f them ’

guage of the Minstrel, must participate in C °* ber ’ the lan-

formerly left to itself must receive within the C ° ntent

the fixed character of the negative. he certaint y and

733 - This higher language, that of Tragedv „ A ,

together the dispersed moments of the inner,’ , closer

the world of action: the substance of the divTn™ W ° dd and

with the nature of the Notion, sunders itself in?’ m a L Ccordanc "

their movement is likewise in conformity with?? S \?^ S ’ ?

ccgard form, .he language cease, * £

enters into the content, just as the content re aw ., u l

1 ceases to be one that


... C. (CC.) RELIGION

444

is imaginatively presented. The hero is himself the speaker, and
the performance displays to the audience who are also specta¬
tors— self-conscious human beings who.teo^ their rights and pur¬
poses, the power and the will of their specific nature and know
how to assert them. They are artists, who do not express with
unconscious naturalness and naivety the external aspect of their
resolves and enterprises, as happens in the language accom¬
panying ordinary actions in actual life; on the contrary, they
give utterance to the inner essence, they prove the rightness of
their action, and the ‘pathos’ which moves them is soberly
asserted and definitely expressed in its universal individuality,
free from the accidents of circumstance and personal idiosyn¬
crasies. Lastly, these characters exist as actual human beings
who impersonate the heroes and portray them, not in the form
of a narrative, but in the actual speech of the actors themselves.
Just as it is essential for the statue to be the work of human
hands, so is the actor essential to his mask—not as an external
condition from which artistically considered we must abstract;
or, so far as we do have to make abstraction from it, we admit
just this, that Art does not yet contain in it the true and proper
self.

734. The general ground on which the movement oi these
shapes produced from the Notion takes place, is the conscious¬
ness expressed in the first imaginative language [that of the
Epic] where the content, devoid of a self, is left disunited. It
is the commonalty as such whpse wisdom finds utterance in the
Chorus of the Elders; in the powerlessness of this chorus the
commonalty has its representative, because the common people
themselves constitute merely the positive and passive material
of the individuality of the government confronting it. Lacking
the power of the negative, it is unable to hold together and to
subdue the riches and varied abundance of the divine life, but
lets it all go its own separate ways, and in its reverential hymns
it extols each individual moment as an independent god, first
one and then another. But where it does detect the earnestness
of the Notion in its onward march dashing these figures to
pieces, and comes to see how ill it fares with its venerated gods
who dare to trespass on ground where the Notion holds sway,
then it is not itself the negative power which actively interferes;
on the contrary, it clings to the self-less thought of such power,


RELIGION in the form of art


445


dings to the consciousness of an alien fate -and produces the
S , Lire for ease and comfort, and feeble talk of appease-
empty des ^ hif?her p0 wers which are the immediate

ment ’ ^' of the Substance, fearful of their struggles among
instrument f pimple se lf 0 f Necessity which

‘ T Tern as well as the living beings linked with them; in
crushes them living beings which it a i so knows to

its compassioi > conscious only of a paralysing terror

be thesam equally helpless pity, and as the end of

of this movem ^ submission to Necessity, whose work

! ta ’ 1 e L d P neither as the necessary deed of the character,

is understoo absolute Being within itself.

nor as the action ^ spectator . C onsciousness [the

73 5, At the nd ^ ^ perfor mance

Chorus], t e not app ear in its scattered multiplicity,

takes place, Si phon of the Notion. Its Substance, there-
butin the simple d P asu nder merely into its two extreme
fore, shows ttse „ mKM | beings are at the same time

powers. These exm > who lace their conscious-

self-conscious find in it determinateness of

ness into one {he effective activity and actuality of

character and const ^ individuation descends aga ,n,

these powers, in ^ ^ immediate reality of existence

as will be remem crowd of spe ctators who have in the

and presents ltse ‘ 0 r rather their own thought express-

Chorus their counterp

ing itself. and m0V e m ent of Spirit which here is

736. The co , . been considered as the nature and

object to Use hical su bstance. In its religion, it attains to
realization ot t of exhibits itself to consciousness in its

a consciousness o simpler embodiment. If, then, the ethica

purer form an ^ Notion, split itself as regards its content

substance, in e de fined as divine and human law, or

into powers w i c 0 f t be upper world—the one the Family,

law of the net er * wef) t b e first being the feminine and the
the other the ta c b ar acter—similarly, now, the previously
second the maSCU r ?od s with its fluctuating characteristics con-
multiform circ e wers which are thereby brought closer to
fines itself to the F p Q[ . (be prev i ous dispersion of the whole
genuine indivi ua bstract forces, which appear hypostatized,
imn manifold ana




446 C. (CC.) RELIGION

is the dissolution of the Subject, which comprehends them only
as moments within its self, so that individuality is merely the
superficial form of these entities. Conversely, a further dis¬
tinction of characters than that just named is to be attributed
to contingent and intrinsically external personality.

737. At the same time, the [ethical] substance is divided with
respect to its form or to knowing. Spirit when acting appears qua
consciousness over against the object to which its activity is
directed and which, consequently, is determined as the negative
of the knower; the doer finds himself thereby in the antithesis
of knowing and not-knowing. He takes his purpose from his
character and knows it as an ethical essentiality; but on account
of the determinateness of his character he knows only the one
power ofsubstance, the other remaining for him concealed. The
present reality is, therefore, one thing in itself and another thing
for consciousness; the upper and the nether law come to signify
in this connection the power that knows and reveals itself to
consciousness, and the power that conceals itself and lies in
ambush. The one is the aspect of Light, the god of the Oracle
who, in accordance with its natural moment, has sprung from
the all-illuminating Sun, knows all and reveals all—Phoebus,
and Zeus who is his father. But the commands of this truth-
speaking god and his announcements of what is, are really de¬
ceptive. For this knowing is, in its principle, immediately a not-
knowing, because consciousness , in its action, is in its own self
this antithesis. He 1 who was able to unlock the riddle of the
Sphinx, and he who trusted with childlike confidence, 2 are,
therefore both sent to destruction through what the god
revealed to them. This priestess through whom the beautiful
god speaks 3 is in no way different from the equivocating sisters
of Fate 4 who, by their promises, drive to crime [those who listen
to them], and who by the double-tongued character of what
they announced as a certainty deceive him 5 who relied on the
obvious meaning. The consciousness, 6 therefore, that is purer
than the latter 5 which believes witches, and is more prudent,

1 Oedipus.

2 Orestes.

3 The Delphic Oracle.

4 The witches in Macbeth.

5 Macbeth.

6 Hamlet.


RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART


447


more solid, and thorough than the former which trusts the pries¬
tess and the beautiful god, tarries with his revenge, even though
the very spirit of his father reveals to him the crime by which
he was murdered, and institutes still other proofs—for the
reason that this revelatory spirit could also be the devil.

738. The grounds of this mistrust are that the knowing con¬
sciousness is caught up in the antithesis of the certainty of itself
and objective essence. Ethical rightness, which holds that what
actually is, is in itself nothing when opposed to absolute law,
learns that its knowing is one-sided, its law only a law of its
own character, and that it has seized on only one of the powers
of the substance. The action itself is this inversion of the known
into its opposite, into being , is the changing-round of the right¬
ness based on character and knowing into the rightness of the
very opposite with which the former is bound up in the essential
nature of the Substance—converts it into the Furies [Erinnyes]
who embody the other power and character aroused into hos¬
tility. This nether right sits with Zeus on the throne and enjoys
equal honour with the god who is revealed and known.

739. To these three beings, the world of the gods of the
Chorus is restricted by the acting individuality. One of them
is the Substance, the power presiding over the hearth and the
spirit of family piety, as well as the universal power of state and
government. Since this distinction belongs to the substance as
such, when it is pictorially represented it is not individualized
in two distinct figures, but has in actuality the two persons of
its characters. On the,other hand, the distinction between
knowing and not-knowing falls within each of the self-con¬
sciousnesses—and only in abstraction, in the element of uni¬
versality, is it divided into two individual shapes. For the self
of the hero has an existence only as a whole consciousness and
is therefore essentially the whole of the distinction belonging to
the form; but its substance is determinate and only one side
of the distinguished content belongs to him. Therefore, the two
sides of consciousness which have in actuality no separate in¬
dividuality peculiar to each receive, wfien pictorially represented ,
each its own particular shape: the one, that of the revelatory
god, the other, that of the Furies who keep themselves con¬
cealed. In part, both enjoy equal honour, but again, the shape
assumed by the substance , Zeus, is the necessity of the relation


448


C. (CC.) RELIGION


of the two to each other. The substance is the relation [a] that
the knowing is for itself\ but has its truth in what is simple; [b]
that the distinction through and in which actual consciousness
exists has its basis in that inner being which destroys it; [c] that
the clear conscious assurance of certainty has its confirmation in
forgetfulness.

740. Consciousness disclosed this antithesis through action;
acting in accordance with the knowledge revealed it finds out
that that knowledge is deceptive; and being committed as
regards the content of that knowledge to one of the attributes
of substance, it violated the other and so gave it the right as
against itself. In following the god that knows, it really got hold
of what was not revealed, and pays the penalty of trusting a
knowledge whose ambiguity, for such is its nature, also becomes
explicit for consciousness and a warning to it. The ravings of
the priestess, the inhuman shape of the witches, the voices of
trees and birds, dreams and so forth, are not the ways in which
truth manifests itself; they are warning signs of deception, of
an absence of self-possession, of the singularity and contingency
of the knowing. Or, in other words, the opposite power which
is violated by consciousness is present as express law and valid
right, whether law of the family or of the state; consciousness,
on the other hand, followed its own way of knowing and con¬
cealed from itself what was openly revealed. The truth, how¬
ever, of the opposing powers of the content [of the knowledge]
and of consciousness is the result that both are equally right,
and therefore in their antithesis, which is brought about by
action, are equally wrong. The action, in being carried out,
emonstrates their unity in the natural downfall of both powers
an self-conscious characters. The reconciliation of the

opposition with itself is the Lethe of the underworld in death;

* e Lethe of the upper world as absolution, not from guilt
or consciousness cannot deny its guilt, because it committed
e act), but from the crime; and also the peace of mind follow-
n g atonement for the crime. Both are oblivion, the vanished-
ess of the reality and the action of the powers of substance,
th 1 e / F * nc ^ v idualities, and of the powers of the abstract
ou g t of good and evil; for none of them by itself is the
essence, which rather is the repose of the whole within itself,
e unmoved unity of Fate, the peaceful existence and con-


RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART


449


sequent inactivity and lack of vitality of family and govern¬
ment, and the equal honour and consequent indifferent unreality
of Apollo and the Furies, and the return of their spiritual life
and activity into the unitary being of Zeus.

741. This Fate completes the depopulation of Heaven, of
that unthinking mingling of individuality and essence—a ming¬
ling whereby the action of essence appears as inconsequent,
arbitrary, unworthy of itself; for individuality that is only
superficially attached to essence is unessential. The expulsion
of such shadowy, insubstantial picture-thoughts which was
demanded by the philosophers of antiquity thus already begins
in [Greek] Tragedy in general through the fact that the division
of the substance is controlled by the Notion, and consequently
individuality is essential individuality, and the determinations
are absolute characters. The self-consciousness that is repre¬
sented in Tragedy, knows and acknowledges, therefore, only
one supreme power, and this Zeus only as the power of the State
or of the hearth, and in the antithesis belonging to knowing
[of knower and known], only as the father of the particular that
is taking shape in the knowing; and also as the Zeus of the oath
and of the Furies, the Zeus of the universal, of the inner being
dwelling in concealment. The further moments issuing from the
Notion and dispersed throughout the pictorial representation,
moments which the Chorus allows to hold sway one after the
other, are, on the other hand, not the ‘pathos’ of the hero; they
sink to the level of passions in the hero, to the level of contingent,
insubstantial moments which, though praised by the imper¬
sonal Chorus, are not capable of constituting the character of
the heroes, nor of being expressed and honoured as their essen¬
tial nature.

742. But also the persons of the divine Being itself, as well
as the character of its substance, coalesce into the simplicity
of what is without consciousness. This Necessity has, in contrast
to self-consciousness, the characteristic of being the negative
power of all the shapes that appear, a power in which they do
not recognize themselves but, on the contrary, perish. The seif
appears merely as assigned to the characters , not as the mediating
factor of the movement. But self-consciousness, the simple cer¬
tainty of self, is in fact the negative power, the unity of Zeus
of substantial being and of abstract Necessity; it is the spiritual



450


C. (CC.) RELIGION


unity into which everything returns. Because actual self-con¬
sciousness is still distinguished from the substance and Fate, it
is partly the Chorus, or rather the crowd of spectators, whom
this movement of the divine life fills with fear as being some¬
thing alien, or in whom this movement, as something close to
them, produces merely the emotion of passive sympathy.
Partly, too, so far as consciousness is involved and belongs to
the characters, this union is an external one, is a hypocrisy,
because the true union, that of the self, Fate, and substance,
is not yet present. The hero who appears before the onlookers
splits up into his mask and the actor, into the person in the
play and the actual self.

743 * The self-consciousness of the hero must step forth from
his mask and present itself as knowing itself to be the fate both
of the gods of the chorus and of the absolute powers themselves,
and as being no longer separated from the chorus, from the uni¬
versal consciousness.


744. Comedy has, therefore, above all, the aspect that actual
self-consciousness exhibits itself as the fate of the gods. These
elementary Beings are, as universal moments, not a self and are
not equal. They are, it is true, endowed with the form of indivi¬
duality, but this is only in imagination and does not really and
truly belong to them; the actual self does not have such an
abstract moment for its substance and content. It, the Subject, is
raise a ove such a moment, such a single property, and clothed
in t is mask it proclaims the irony of such a property wanting to
be something on its own account. The pretensions of universal
essennahty are uncovered in the self; it shows itself to be
angled in an actual existence, and drops the mask just

here wr!' l ° be somethin g genuine. The self, appearing

whirh ;» Slgmficance as something actual, plays with the mask
breaks oiTa! P ut on »n order to act its part; but it as quickly
in its own n f a !? r ° m tb * S illusor Y character and stands forth
distinct from th ^ ordinariness > whi ch it shows to be not
7a.it Thk C gC ?j me Se ^’ l ^ e actor > or from the spectator,
as a^whole in S ^ era . d ' SSolutionofthesh apesofthe essentiality
Detulant and , . eir mdividuality becomes in its content more
^ , Itter in so f ar as the content has its more serious

and necessary meaning. The divine substance unites within
itself the meaning of natural and ethical essentiality. As regards


45 1


RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART

the natural element, actual self-consciousness shows in the very
fact of employing things of Nature for its adornment, for its
dwelling, and also in feasting on its sacrificial offering, that it
is itself the Fate to which the secret is revealed, viz. the truth
about the essential independence of Nature. In the mystery of
bread and wine, it appropriates this independence along with
the meaning of the inner essence; and in Comedy, it is conscious
of the irony of this meaning generally. Now, in so far as this
meaning contains ethical essentiality, it is partly the nation in
its two aspects of the state, or Demos proper, and the individu¬
ality of the Family; partly, however, it is a self-conscious pure
knowing, or the rational thinking of the universal. This Demos ,
the general mass, which knows itself as lord and ruler, and is
also aware of being the intelligence and insight which demand
respect, is constrained and befooled through the particularity
of its actual existence, and exhibits the ludicrous contrast
between its own opinion of itself and its immediate existence,
between its necessity and contingency, its universality and its
commonness. If the principle of its individuality, separated
from the universal, makes itself conspicuous in the proper shape
of an actual existence and openly usurps and administers the
commonwealth to which it is a secret detriment, then there is
exposed more immediately the contrast between the universal
as a theory and that with which practice is concerned; there
is exposed the complete emancipation of the purposes of the
immediate individuality from the universal order, and the con¬
tempt of such an individuality for that order.

746. Rational thinking frees the divine Being from its contin¬
gent shape and, in antithesis to the unthinking wisdom of the
Chorus which produces all sorts of ethical maxims and gives
currency to a host of laws and specific concepts of duty and
of right, lifts these into the simple Ideas of the Beautiful and
the Good. I he movement of this abstraction is the consciousness
of the dialectic contained in these maxims and laws themselves,
and, consequently, the consciousness of the vanishing of the
absolute validity previously attaching to them. With the
vanishing of the contingent character and superficial individu¬
ality which imagination lent to the divine Beings, all that is
left to them as regards their natural aspect is the bareness of their
immediate existence; they are clouds, an evanescent mist, like



452


C. (CC.) RELIGION

those imaginative representations. The essence of these having
been given the form of thought , they have become the simple
thoughts of the Beautiful and the Good, which tolerate being
filled with any kind of content. The power of dialectic know¬
ledge puts specific laws and maxims of conduct at the mercy
of the pleasure and frivolity of youth which is led astray by it,
and provides weapons for deceiving old age with its fears and
apprehensions and which is restricted to life in its individual
aspect. The pure thoughts of the Beautiful and the Good thus
display a comic spectacle: through their liberation from the
opinion which contains both their specific determinateness as
content and also their absolute determinateness, liberation,
that is, from the firm hold of consciousness on these determina¬
tenesses, they become empty, and just for that reason the sport
of mere opinion and the caprice of any chance individuality.

747. Therefore, the Fate which up to this point has lacked
consciousness and consists in an empty repose and oblivion, and
is separated from self-consciousness, this Fate is now united with
self-consciousness. The individual self is the negative power
through which and in which the gods, as also their moments,
viz. existent Nature and the thoughts of their specific charac¬
ters, vanish. At the same time, the individual self is not the
emptiness of this disappearance but, on the contrary, preserves
itself in this very nothingness, abides with itself and is the sole
actuality. In it, the religion of Art is consummated and has com¬
pletely returned into itself. Through the fact that it is the indivi¬
dual consciousness in the certainty of itself that exhibits itseli
as this absolute power, this latter has lost the form of something
presented to consciousness , something altogether separate from con
sciousness and alien to it, as were the statue, and also the living
beautiful corporeality, or the content of the Epic and the powers
and persons of Tragedy. This unity, too, is not the unconscious
U ^ ty r °^ t ^ le an d the mysteries; on the contrary, the actua
self of the actor coincides with what he impersonates, just as
the spectator is completely at home in the drama performed
before him and sees himself playing in it. What this self-con¬
sciousness beholds is that whatever assumes the form of essenti¬
ality over against it, is instead dissolved in it—in its thinking,
its existence, and its action—and is at its mercy. It is the return
of everything universal into the certainty of itself which, in con-


THE REVEALED RELIGION


453


sequence, is this complete loss of fear and of essential being on
the part of all that is alien. This self-certainty is a state of
spiritual well-being and of repose therein, such as is not to be
found anywhere outside of this Comedy.
