C. THE REVEALED RELIGION

748. Through the religion of Art, Spirit has advanced from
the form of Substance to assume that of Subject , for it produces its
[outer] shape, thus making explicit in it the act, or the self-
consciousness, that merely vanishes in the awful Substance, and
does not apprehend its own self in its trust. This incarnation
of the divine Being starts from the statue which wears only the
outer shape of the Self, the inwardness , the Selfs activity, falling
outside of it. But in the Cult the two sides have become one;
and in the outcome of the religion of Art this unity, in its con¬
summation, has even gone right over at the same time to the
extreme of the Self. In Spirit that is completely certain of itself
in the individuality of consciousness, all essentiality is sub¬
merged. The proposition that expresses this levity runs: ‘The
Self is absolute Being.’ The essence, the Substance, for which
the Self was [only] an accident, has sunk to the level of a predi¬
cate; and in this self-consciousness over against which there is
nothing in the form of essence, Spirit has lost its consciousness.

749. This proposition: ‘The Self is absolute Being’, belongs
quite obviously to the non-religious, actual [or secular] Spirit;
and vye have to remember which shape of that Spirit it is which
expresses it. It will contain the movement, and also the con¬
version of it, which degrades the Self to the level of a predicate
and elevates Substance to Subject; and in this manner, that
the converse proposition does not in itself or for us make Sub¬
stance into Subject, or, to put the same thing another way, it
does not reinstate Substance in such a manner that Spirit’s con¬
sciousness is led back to its beginning, to natural religion; on
the contrary, this conversion is one that is brought about for
and by self consciousness itself. Since self-consciousness surrenders
itself consciously, it is preserved in its alienation and
remains the Subject of substance, but since it is likewise self-
alienated, it still has the consciousness of the substance; or,
since self-consciousness through its sacrifice brings forth sub-



454


C (CC.) RELIGION

stance as Subject the substance remains self-consciousness’s
own Self. In the rst of the two alternative propositions, the
substantiality of the Subject merely vanishes, and in the second,
Substance is only a predicate, and both sides are thus present
m each with contrary inequality of value. Here, however the
result achieved is the union and permeation of the two natures
in which both are, with equal value, essential and at the same
time only moments; so that Spirit is simultaneously consciousness
of itself as its substance, and simple self-consciousness com-

muning with itself.

750. The religion of Art belongs to the ethical Spirit which
we earlier saw perish in the condition of right or law, i.e. in the
proposition: ‘The Self as such, the abstract person, is absolute
Being. In the ethical life, the Self is submerged in the Spirit
o its people, it is the universality that is filled. But simple individu¬
ality raises itself out of this content, and its levity refines it into
a person , into the abstract universality of right or law. In this,
he reality of the ethical Spirit is lost, and having lost all content,
the Spirits of national individuals are gathered into a single
pantheon not into a pantheon of picture-thought whose power¬
less form lets each Spirit go its own way, but into the pantheon
ol abstract universality, of pure thought which disembodies
them and imparts to the spiritless Self, to the individual person,
a being that is in and for itself

75 '• But this Self has, through its emptiness, let the content
go free, ,t is only within itself that consciousness is essence; H*
ownew^rr thelega! recognition of the person, is the unfilled
abstractj What it possesses, therefore, is rather only the
thought of itself; or in other words, in the mode in which it
^mediately exists and knows itself as object, it is something
hat is ; not actual. Hence it is only the Stoic independence of
thought, which passes through the dialectic of the Sceptical
caET n ?T S u° fin( W rUth in that shape which we have

called the Unhappy Self-consciousness.

, ^ 5 2 - This self-consciousness knows what the validity of the
abstract person amounts to in reality and equally in pure
thought. It knows that such validity is rather a complete loss;
it is itself this conscious loss of itself and the alienation of its
knowledge about itself. We see that this Unhappy Conscious¬
ness constitutes the counterpart and the completion of the




THE REVEALED RELIGION


455


comic consciousness that is perfectly happy within itself. Into
the latter, all divine being returns, or it is the complete aliena¬
tion of substance. The Unhappy Consciousness, on the other
hand, is, conversely, the tragic fate of the certainty of self that
aims to be absolute. It is the consciousness of the loss of all essen¬
tial being in this certainty of itself , and of the loss even of this
knowledge about itself—the loss of substance as well as of the
Self, it is the grief which expresses itself in the hard saying that
‘God is dead’.

753. In the condition of right or law, then, the ethical world
and the religion of that world are submerged and lost in the
comic consciousness, and the Unhappy Consciousness is the
knowledge of this total loss. It has lost both the worth it attached
to its immediate personality and the worth attached to its per¬
sonality as mediated, as thought. Trust in the eternal laws of the
gods has vanished, and the Oracles, which pronounced on par¬
ticular questions, are dumb. The statues are now only stones
from which the living soul has flown, just as the hymns are
words from which belief has gone. The tables of the gods pro¬
vide no spiritual food and drink, and in his games and festivals
man no longer recovers the joyful consciousness of his unity with
the divine. The works of the Muse now lack the power of the
Spirit, for the Spirit has gained its certainty of itself from the
crushing of gods and men. They have become what they are
for us now—beautiful fruit already picked from the tree, which
a friendly Fate has offered us, as a girl might set the fruit before
us. It cannot give us the actual life in which they existed, not
the tree that bore them, not the earth and the elements which
constituted their substance, not the climate which gave them
their peculiar character, nor the cycle of the changing seasons
that governed the process of their growth. So Fate does not re¬
store their world to us along with the works of antique Art, it
gives not the spring and summer of the ethical life in which
they blossomed and ripened, but only the veiled recollection
of that actual world. Our active enjoyment of them is therefore
not an act of divine worship through which our consciousness
might come to its perfect truth and fulfilment; it is an external
activity—the wiping-off of some drops of rain or specks of dust
from these fruits, so to speak—one which erects an intricate
scaffolding of the dead elements of their outward existence—






45 g C. (CC.) RELIGION

the language, the historical circumstances, etc. in place of the
inner elements of the ethical life which environed, created, and
inspired them. And all this we do, not in order to enter into
their very life but only to possess an idea of them in our imagina¬
tion. But, just as the girl who offers us the plucked fruits is more
than the Nature which directly provides them—the Nature
diversified into their conditions and elements, the tree, air,
light, and so on—because she sums all this up in a higher mode,
in the gleam of her self-conscious eye and in the gesture with
which she offers them, so, too, the Spirit of the Fate that presents
us with those works of art is more than the ethical life and the
actual world of that nation, for it is the inwardizing in us of the
Spirit which in them was still [only] outwardlxf manifested; it
is the Spirit of the tragic Fate which gathers all those indivi¬
dual gods and attributes of the [divine] substance into one
pantheon, into the Spirit that is itself conscious of itself as
Spirit.

754- All the conditions for its production are to hand, and
this totality of its conditions constitutes its coming-to-be, its
Notion, or the production of it in principle. The circle of the crea¬
tions of Art embraces the forms in which absolute substance
has externalized itself. Absolute substance is in the form of in¬
dividuality as a Thing, an object of sensuous consciousness that
simply is as pure language, or the coming-to-be of a shape
whose existence does not go outside of the Self, but is purely
a vanishing object; as immediate unity with the universal self-
consciousness in its inspiration, and as a mediated unity in the
act of the Cult; as a beautiful, self-like corporeality; and lastly,
as existence raised into an ideational presentation and the
expansion of this existence into a world which finally collects
itself together into a universality which is at the same time a
pure certainty of itself. These forms, and on the other side, the
world of the person and of law, the destructive ferocity of the
freed elements of the content, as also the person as thought in
Stoicism, and the unstable restlessness of the Sceptical con¬
sciousness, constitute the [audience or] periphery of shapes
which stands impatiently expectant round the birthplace of
Spirit as it becomes self-consciousness [i.e. round the manger
at Bethlehem]. The grief and longing of the Unhappy Self-con¬
sciousness which permeates them all is their centre and the com-


THE REVEALED RELIGION


457


mon birth-pang of its emergence—the simplicity of the pure
Notion, which contains those forms as its moments.

755. Spirit has in it the two sides which are presented above
as two converse propositions: one is this, that substance
alienates itself from itself and becomes self-consciousness; the
other is the converse, that self-consciousness alienates itself from
itself and gives itself the nature of a Thing, or makes itself a
universal Self. Both sides have in this way encountered each
other, and through this encounter their true union has come
into being. The externalization [or kenosis] of substance, its
growth into self-consciousness, expresses the transition into the
opposite, the unconscious transition of necessity ; in other words,
that substance is in itself self-consciousness. Conversely, the
externalization of self-consciousness expresses this, that it is in
itself the universal essence, or—since the Self is pure being-for-
self which in its opposite communes with itself—that it is just
because substance is self-consciousness for the Self that it is
Spirit. Of this Spirit, which has abandoned the form of Sub¬
stance and enters existence in the shape of self-consciousness,
it may therefore be said—if we wish to employ relationships de¬
rived from natural generation—that it has an actual mother but
an implicit father. For actuality or self-consciousness, and the in -
itself 2ls substance, are its two moments through whose reciprocal
externalization, each becoming the other, Spirit comes into ex¬
istence as this their unity.

756. In so far as self-consciousness one-sidedly grasps only
its own externalization, then, even though its object is for it just
as much Being as Self, and it knows all existence to be spiritual
in nature, nevertheless true Spirit has still not yet come to be
explicitly for self-consciousness, inasmuch as being in general,
or Substance, has not equally, on its side, implicitly externalized
itself and become self-consciousness. For in that case, then, all
existence is spiritual being only from the standpoint of con¬
sciousness, not in its own self. Spirit is in this way only imagined
into existence; this imagining is the visionary dreaming which
insinuates into both Nature and history, into the world and into
the mythical ideas of earlier religions, another, esoteric mean¬
ing than that which lies on the surface, and in the case of reli¬
gions, another meaning than the one known in them by the
self-consciousness whose religions they were. But this meaning



45®


C. (CC.) RELIGION

is one that is borrowed, a garment which does not cover the
nakedness of the appearance and merits neither belief nor
reverence; it is no more than the dark night and self-delusive
rapture of consciousness.

757. If, therefore, this meaning of the objective is not to be
mere imagination, it must possess intrinsic being, must originally
appear in consciousness as stemming from the Notion and must
come forth in its necessity. It is thus that self-knowing Spirit
has arisen for us, viz. through the cognition of the immediate con¬
sciousness, or of the consciousness of the object in its immediacy,
through its necessary movement. This Notion which, as imme¬
diate, had also the shape of immediacy for its consciousness,
has, in the second place, given itself the shape of implicit self-
consciousness, i.e. by just the same necessity of the Notion by
which being or the immediacy which is the content-less object of
sensuous consciousness, externalizes itself and becomes the I
for consciousness. But the immediate in-itself or the necessity that
simply is, is itself different from the in-itself that thinks , or from
the cognition of necessity —a difference, however, which at the
same time does not lie outside of the Notion, for the simple unity
of the Notion is immediate being itself. The Notion is at once a
self-externalization or a coming-to-be of intuitively perceived
necessity , and also in this necessity is in communion with itself,
knows it and comprehends it. The immediate in-itself of Spirit
that gives itself the shape of self-consciousness means nothing
else than that the actual World-Spirit has attained to this know¬
ledge ol itself; it is then, too, that this knowledge also first enters
its consciousness. How that came about we have already seen.

758. d hat absolute Spirit has given itself implicitly the shape
o self-consciousness, and therefore has also given it for its con¬
sciousness this now appears as the belief of the world that Spirit
is immediately present as a self-conscious Being, i.e. as an actual
man, that the believer is immediately certain of Spirit, sees, feels,
and hears this divinity. Thus this self-consciousness is not imagi¬
nation, but is actual in the believer. Consciousness, then, does
not start from its inner life, from thought, and unite within itself
the thought of God with existence; on the contrary, it starts
from an existence that is immediately present and recognizes
God therein. The moment of immediate being is present in the
content of the Notion in such a way that the religious Spirit,


THE REVEALED RELIGION


459


in the return of all essentiality into consciousness, has become
a simple positive Self, just as the actual Spirit as such in the Un¬
happy Consciousness was just this simple , self-conscious nega¬
tivity. The Self of existent Spirit has, as a result, the form of
complete immediacy; it is posited neither as something thought
or imagined, nor as something produced, as is the case with
the immediate Self in natural religion, and also in the religion
of Art; on the contrary, this God is sensuously and directly
beheld as a Self, as an actual individual man; only so is this
God self-consciousness.

759. This incarnation of the divine Being, or the fact that
it essentially and directly has the shape of self-consciousness,
is the simple content of the absolute religion. In this religion
the divine Being is known as Spirit, or this religion is the con¬
sciousness of the divine Being that it is Spirit. For Spirit is the
knowledge of oneself in the externalization of oneself; the being
that is the movement of retaining its self-identity in its other¬
ness. This, however, is Substance, in so far as Substance is, in
its accidents, at the same time reflected into itself, not in¬
different to them as to something unessential or present in them
as in an alien element, but in them it is within itself, i.e. in so
far as it is Subject or Self. Consequently, in this religion the
divine Being is revealed. Its being revealed obviously consists
in this, that what it is, is known. But it is known precisely in
its being known as Spirit, as a Being that is essentially a self-
conscious Being. For there is something hidden from consciousness
in its object if the object is for consciousness an ‘other’ or some¬
thing alien , and if it does not know it as its own self. This con¬
cealment ceases when the absolute Being qua Spirit is the object
of consciousness; for then the object has the form of Self in its
relation to consciousness, i.e. consciousness knows itself imme¬
diately in the object, or is manifest to itself in the object. Con¬
sciousness is manifest to itself only in its own certainty of itself;
its object now is the Self, but the Self is nothing alien; on the
contrary, it is the indissoluble unity with itself, the universal that
is immediately such. It is the pure Notion, pure Thought or
being-for-self which is immediately being , and consequently being-
for-an other , and as this being-for-an other is immediately returned
into itself and in communion with itself; it is, therefore, that
which is truly and alone revealed. The Good, the Righteous,



460 C. (CC.) RELIGION

the Holy, Creator of Heaven and Earth, and so on, are predi¬
cates of a Subject—universal moments which have their sup¬
port on this point and only are when consciousness withdraws
into thought. As long as it is they that are known, their ground
and essence, the Subject itself is not yet revealed; and similarly,
the determinations of the universal are not this universal itself. The
Subject itself, and consequently this pure universal too, is, how¬
ever, revealed as Self, for this is just this inner being which is
reflected into itself and which is immediately present and is the
self-certainty of the Self for which it is present. This—to be in
accordance with its Notion that which is revealed—this is, then,
the true shape of Spirit, and this its shape, the Notion, is likewise
alone its essence and its substance. Spirit is known as self-con¬
sciousness and to this self-consciousness it is immediately
revealed, for Spirit is this self-consciousness itself. The divine
nature is the same as the human, and it is this unity that is
beheld.

760. Here, therefore, consciousness—or the mode in which
essence is for consciousness itself, i.e. its shape—is, in fact, identi¬
cal with its self-consciousness. This shape is itself a self-con¬
sciousness; it is thus at the same time an object in the mode
of immediate being, and this being, likewise immediately, has
the significance of pure Thought, of absolute Being. The abso¬
lute Being which exists as an actual self-consciousness seems
to have come down from its eternal simplicity, but by thus com¬
ing down it has in fact attained for the first time to its own highest
essence. For it is only when the Notion of essence has reached
its simple purity that it is the absolute abstraction which is pure
Thought and hence the pure individuality of Self, just as, on
account of its simplicity, it is also the immediate or being. What
is called sense-consciousness is just this pure abstraction , it is this
thinking for which being is the immediate. Thus the lowest
is at the same time the highest; the revealed which has come
forth wholly on to the surface is precisely therein the most pro¬
found. That the supreme Being is seen, heard, etc. as an imme¬
diately present self-consciousness, this therefore is indeed the
consummation of its Notion; and through this consummation
that Being is immediately present qua supreme Being.

761. I his immediate existence is at the same time not solely
and simply immediate consciousness, but is religious conscious-


THE REVEALED RELIGION


461

ness; the immediacy has inseparably the meaning not only of
a self-consciousness that immediately is, but also of the supreme
Being as an absolute essence in pure thought, or absolute Being.
What we are conscious of in our Notion, viz. that Being is
Essence, is what the religious consciousness is also conscious of.
This unity of Being and Essence, of Thought which is imme¬
diately Existence, is both the thought of this religious conscious¬
ness, or its mediated knowledge, and equally its immediate know¬
ledge; for this unity of Being and Thought is ^//'-consciousness
and is itself immediately present , or the thought unity has at the
same time this [existential] shape of what it is. Here, therefore,
God is revealed as He is; He is immediately present as He is in
Himself, i.e. He is immediately present as Spirit. God is attainable
in pure speculative knowledge alone and is only in that know¬
ledge, and is only that knowledge itself, for He is Spirit; and
this speculative knowledge is the knowledge of the revealed reli¬
gion. Speculative knowledge knows God as Thought or pure
Essence, and knows this Thought as simple Being and as Exist¬
ence, and Existence as the negativity of itself, hence as Self, as
the Self that is at the same time this individual, and also the
universal , Self. It is precisely this that the revealed religion
knows. The hopes and expectations of the world up till now
had pressed forward solely to this revelation, to behold what
absolute Being is, and in it to find itself. The joy of beholding
itself in absolute Being enters self-consciousness and seizes the
whole world; for it is Spirit, it is the simple movement of those
pure moments, which expresses just this: that only when abso¬
lute Being is beheld as an immediate self-consciousness is it known
as Spirit.

762. This Notion of Spirit that knows itself as Spirit is itself
the immediate Notion and is not yet developed. Absolute Being
is Spirit, i.e it has appeared, it is revealed; this first revelation
is itself immediate; but the immediacy is equally pure mediation
or thought, and it must therefore exhibit this in its own sphere
as such. Looking at this more closely, Spirit, in the immediacy
of self-consciousness, is this individual self-consciousness, and so
in an antithesis to the universal self-consciousness. It is an exclu¬
sive One or unit which has the still unresolved form of a sen¬
suous ‘other’ for the consciousness for which it is immediately
present. This ‘other’ does not as yet know Spirit as its own,



462


C. (CC.) RELIGION


i.e. Spirit as an individual Self is not yet equally the universal
Self, the Self of everyone. In other words, the shape has not
as yet the form of the Notion, i.e. of the universal Self, of the
Self that in its immediate actuality is at the same time a super¬
seded Self, viz. Thought, universality, without losing its actu¬
ality in this universality. But the proximate form of this uni¬
versality, the form that is itself immediate, is not yet the form
of thought itself, of the Notion as Notion , but the universality of
reality, the ‘allness’ or totality of the selves, and the raising of
existence into an ideational form; as in every case, and to cite
a specific example, the superseded This of sense is, in the first
place, the Thing of perception, not yet the universal of the Under¬
standing.

763. This individual man, then, which absolute Being has
revealed itself to be, accomplishes in himself as an individual
the movement of sensuous Being. He is the immediately present
God; consequently, his ‘ being 3 passes over into f having been \ Con¬
sciousness, for which God is thus sensuously present, ceases to
see and to hear Him; it has seen and heard Him; and it is
because it only has seen and heard Him that it first becomes
itselfspiritual consciousness. Or, in other words, just as formerly
He rose up for consciousness as a sensuous existence , now He has
arisen in the Spirit. For a consciousness that sensuously sees and
hears Him is itselfa merely immediate consciousness, which has
not overcome the disparity of objectivity, has not taken it back
into pure thought: it knows this objective individual, but not
itself, as Spirit. In the vanishing of the immediate existence
known to be absolute Being the immediacy receives its negative
moment; Spirit remains the immediate Self of actuality, but
as the universal self-consciousness of the [religious] community, a
self-consciousness which reposes in its own substance, just as
in it this Substance is a universal Subject: not the individual
bv himself, but together with the consciousness of the com¬
munity and what he is for this community, is the complete
Whole of the individual as Spirit.

764. Remoteness in time and space is, however, only the imper¬
fect form in which the immediate mode [of existence] is given
a mediated or universal character; it is merely dipped superfici¬
ally in the element of Thought, is preserved in it as a sensuous
mode, and not made one with the nature of Thought itself. It


THE REVEALED RELIGION


463


is merely raised into the realm of picture-thinking, for this is
the synthetic combination of sensuous immediacy and its uni¬
versality or Thought.

765. This form of picture-thinking constitutes the specific mode
in which Spirit, in this community, becomes aware of itself. This
form is not yet Spirit’s self-consciousness that has advanced to
its Notion qua Notion: the mediation is still incomplete. This
combination of Being and Thought is, therefore, defective in
that spiritual Being is still burdened with an unreconciled split
into a Here and a Beyond. The content is the true content, but
all its moments, when placed in the medium of picture-think¬
ing, have the character of being uncomprehended [in terms of
the Notion], of appearing as completely independent sides
which are externally connected with each other. Before the true
content can also receive its true form for consciousness, a higher
formative development of consciousness is necessary; it must
raise its intuition of absolute Substance into the Notion, and
equate its consciousness with its self-consciousness for itself just
as this has happened for us, or in itself

766. This content is to be considered as it exists in its con¬
sciousness. Absolute Spirit is the content , and is thus in the shape
of its truth. But its truth is to be not merely the Substance or
the in-itself of the community, nor merely to step forth out of
this inwardness into the objectivity of picture-thinking, but to
become an actual Self, to reflect itself into itself and to be Sub¬
ject. This, therefore, is the movement which it accomplishes in
its community, or this is the life of the community. Con¬
sequently, what this self-revealing Spirit is in andfor itself \ is not
elicited by, as it were, unravelling the rich life of Spirit in the
community and tracing it back to its original strands, to the
ideas, say, of the primitive imperfect community, or even to
the utterances of the actual man himself. This ‘tracing-back’
is based on the instinct to get to the Notion; but it confuses
the origin of the Notion as the immediate existence of its first
manifestation with the simplicity of the Notion. What results
from this impoverishment ofSpirit, from getting rid of the idea of
the community, and its action with regard to its idea, is not the
Notion,but rather bare externality andsingularity,thehistorical
manner of the manifestation in its immediacy and the non-spiri¬
tual recollection of a supposed individual figure and of its past.


4 6 4


C. (CC.) RELIGION


767. Spirit is the content of its consciousness at first in the
form of pure substance , or is the content of its pure consciousness.
This element of Thought is the movement of descending into
existence or into individuality. The middle term between these
two is their synthetic connection, the consciousness of passing
into otherness, or picture-thinking as such. The third moment
is the return from picture-thinking and otherness, or the ele¬
ment of self-consciousness itself. These three moments con¬
stitute Spirit; its dissociation in picture-thinking consists in its
existing in a specific or determinate mode; but this determinate¬
ness is nothing else than one of its moments. Its complete move¬
ment is therefore this, to diffuse its nature throughout each of
its moments as in its native element; since each of these spheres
completes itself within itself, this reflection of one sphere into
itself is at the same time the transition into another. Picture-
thinking constitutes the middle term between pure thought and
self-consciousness as such, and is only one of the specific or
determinate forms; at the same time, however, as we have seen,
its character—that of being a synthetic connection—is diffused
throughout all these elements and is their common deter¬
minateness.

768. The content itself which we have to consider has partly
been met with already as the idea of the ‘unhappy’ and the
‘believing’ consciousness; but in the former, it has the character
of a content produced from consciousness for which Spirit
yearns, and in which Spirit cannot be satiated or find rest,
because it is not yet in itself its own content, or is not the Sub¬
stance of it. In the ‘believing’ consciousness, on the other hand,
the content was regarded as the self-less Being of the world, or
as essentially an objective content of picture-thinking, of a
picture-thinking that simply flees from reality and consequently
is without the certainty of self-consciousness, which is separated
from it partly by the conceit of knowing and partly by pure
insight. The consciousness of the community, on the other

and, possesses the content for its substance , just as the content
is the certainty of the community’s own Spirit.

769. When Spirit is at first conceived of as substance in the
element of pure thought, it is immediately simple and self¬
identical, eternal essence, which does not, however, have this
abstract meaning of essence, but the meaning of absolute Spirit.


THE REVEALED RELIGION


4 6 5


Only Spirit is not a ‘meaning’, is not what is inner, but what
is actual. Therefore simple, eternal essence would be Spirit only
as a form of empty words, if we went no further than the idea
expressed in the phrase ‘simple, eternal essence’. But simple
essence, because it is an abstraction, is, in fact, the negative in
its own self and, moreover, the negativity of thought, or nega¬
tivity as it is in itself in essence; i.e. simple essence is absolute
difference from itself, or its pure othering of itself. As essence it
is only in itself or for us; but since this purity is just abstraction
or negativity, it is for itself , or is the Self, the Notion. It is thus
objective; and since picture-thinking interprets and expresses
as a happening what has just been expressed as the necessity of
the Notion, it is said that the eternal Being begets for itself an
‘other’. But in this otherness it has at the same time immediately
returned into itself; for the difference is the difference in itself
i.e. it is immediately distinguished only from itself and is thus
the unity that has returned into itself.

770. There are thus three distinct moments: essence, being-
for-self which is the otherness of essence and for which essence
is, and being-for-self, or the knowledge of itself in the ( other .
Essence beholds only its own self in its being-for-self; in this
externalization of itself it stays only with itself: the being-for-
self that shuts itself out from essence is essence's knowledge of its
own self It is the word which, when uttered, leaves behind,
externalized and emptied, him who uttered it, but which is as
immediately heard, and only this hearing of its own self is
the existence of the Word. Thus the distinctions made are im¬
mediately resolved as soon as they are made, and are made as
soon as they are resolved, and what is true and actual is precisely
this immanent circular movement.

771. This immanent movement proclaims the absolute
Being as Spirit. Absolute Being that is not grasped as Spirit is
merely the abstract void, just as Spirit that is not grasped as
this movement is only an empty word. When its moments are
grasped in their purity, they are the restless Notions which.only
are , in being in themselves their own opposite, and in finding
their rest in the whole. But the picture-thinking of the religious
community is not this speculative thinking; it has the content,
but without its necessity, and instead of the form of the Notion
it brings into the realm of pure consciousness the natural rela-



4-66


C. (CC.) RELIGION


tionships of father and son. Since this consciousness, even in
its thinking, remains at the level of picture-thinking, absolute
Being is indeed revealed to it, but the moments of this Being,
on account of this [empirically] synthetic presentation, partly
themselves fall asunder so that they are not related to one
another through their own Notion, and partly this consciousness
retreats from this its pure object, relating itself to it only in
an external manner. The object is revealed to it by something
alien, and it does not recognize itself in this thought of Spirit,
does not recognize the nature of pure self-consciousness. In
so far as the form of picture-thinking and of those relationships
derived from Nature must be transcended, and especially also
the standpoint which takes the moments of the movement
which Spirit is, as isolated immovable Substances or Subjects,
instead of transient moments—the transcending of this stand¬
point is to be regarded as a compulsion on the part of the
Notion, as we pointed out earlier in connection with another
aspect. But since this compulsion is instinctive, self-conscious¬
ness misunderstands its own nature, rejects the content as well
as the form and, what amounts to the same thing, degrades the
content into a historical pictorial idea and to an heirloom
handed down by tradition. In this way, it is only the purely
external element in belief that is retained and as something
therefore that is dead and cannot be known; but the inner ele¬
ment in faith has vanished, because this would be the Notion
that knows itself as Notion.

772. Absolute Spirit as pictured in pure essence is not indeed
abstract pure essence; for abstract essence has sunk to the level
of being merely an element, just because it is only a moment in
[the life of] Spirit. But the representation of Spirit in this ele¬
ment is charged with the same defect of form which essence as
such has. Essence is an abstraction and is therefore the negation
of its simple, unitary nature, is an ‘other’; similarly, Spirit in
t e e ement of essence is the form of simple oneness , which there-
ore is equally essentially an othering of itself. Or, what is the
same thing, the relation of the eternal Being to its being-for-
v? v/ S i!r e lrnm . ediate ly simple one of pure thought. In this simple
rJL*? °^*tself in the ‘other’, the otherness is therefore not

• 1 e ,. as suc h> it is the difference which, in pure thought, is

e late y no difference ; a loving recognition in which the two


THE REVEALED RELIGION


467


sides, as regards their essence, do not stand in an antithetical
relation to each other. Spirit that is expressed in the element
of pure thought is itself essentially this, to be not merely in this
element, but to be actual Spirit, for in its Notion lies otherness
itself, i.e. the supersession of the pure Notion that is only
thought.

773. The element of pure thought, because it is an abstract
element, is itself rather the ‘ other 3 of its simple, unitary nature,
and therefore passes over into the element proper to picture¬
thinking—the element in which the moments of the pure
Notion obtain a substantial existence relatively to one another,
and also are Subjects which do not possess for a third the in¬
difference towards each other of [mere] being but, being re¬
flected into themselves, spontaneously part asunder and also
place themselves over against each other.

774. Thus the merely eternal or abstract Spirit becomes an
‘other’ to itself, or enters into existence, and directly into imme¬
diate existence. Accordingly, it creates a world. This ‘creating’
is picture-thinking’s word for the Notion itself in its absolute
movement; or to express the fact that the simple which has been
asserted as absolute, or pure thought, just because it is abstract,
is rather the negative, and hence the self-opposed or ‘other’ of
itself; or because, toputthesamethinginanotherform, that which
is posited as essence is simple immediacy or being, but qua imme¬
diacy or being lacks Self and, therefore, lacking inwardness is
passive , or a being-f or-another. This being-for-another is at the same
time a world\ Spirit, in the determination of being-for-another,
is the inert subsistence of the moments formerly enclosed within
pure thought, is therefore the dissolution of their simple uni¬
versality and the parting asunder of them into their own parti¬
cularity.

775. But the world is not merely this Spirit cast out and dis¬
persed into the fulness [of natural existence] and its external
ordering; for since Spirit is essentially the simple Self, this Self
is equally present in the world: it is the existent Spirit, which
is the individual Self which has consciousness and distinguishes
itself as ‘other’, or as world, from itself. This individual Self as
at first thus immediately posited, is not yet Spirit for itself ; it
does not exist as Spirit; it can be called ‘innocent’ but hardly
‘good’. Before it can in fact be Self and Spirit it must first


468 C. (CC.) RELIGION

become an ‘other 5 to its own self, just as the eternal Being
exhibits itself as the movement of being self-identical in its oth¬
erness. Since this Spirit is determined as at first an immediate
existence, or as dispersed into the multifariousness of its con¬
sciousness, its othering of itself is the withdrawal into itself , or
self-centredness, of knowing as such. Immediate existence sud¬
denly turns into thought, or mere sense-consciousness into
consciousness of thought; and, moreover, because the thought
stems from immediacy or is conditioned thought, it is not pure
knowledge, but thought that is charged with otherness and is,
therefore, the self-opposed thought of Good and Evil. Man is
pictorially thought of in this way: that it once happened , without
any necessity, that he lost the form of being at one with himself
through plucking the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of Good
and Evil, and was expelled from the state of innocence, from
Nature which yielded its fruits without toil, and from Paradise,
from the garden with its creatures.

776. Since this withdrawal into itself or self-centredness of
the existent consciousness immediately makes it self-discordant,
Evil appears as the primary existence of the inwardly-turned
consciousness; and because the thoughts of Good and Evil are
utterly opposed and this antithesis is not yet resolved, this con¬
sciousness is essentially only evil. But at the same time, on
account of just this antithesis, there is also present the good con¬
sciousness opposing it, and their relation to each other. I n so
far as immediate existence suddenly changes into Thought , and
the being-within-self is on the one hand itself a thinking, while
on the other hand the moment of the othering of essence is more
precisely determined by it—[because of this double aspect] the
becoming of Evil can be shifted further back out of the existent
world even into the primary realm of Thought. It can therefore
be said that it is the very first-born Son of Light [Lucifer] him¬
self who fell because he withdrew into himself or became self-
centred, but that in his place another was at once created. Such
a form of expression as ‘fallen 5 which, like the expression ‘Son’,
belongs, moreover, to picture-thinking and not to the Notion,
degrades the moments of the Notion to the level of picture¬
thinking or carries picture-thinking over into the realm of
thought. Likewise it makes no difference if we co-ordinate a
multiplicity of other shapes with the simple thought of otherness


THE REVEALED RELIGION 469

in the eternal Being and transfer the self-centredness into them.
In fact, this co-ordination must be approved, since by means
of it this moment of otherness also expresses diversity, as it should;
and, moreover, not as plurality in general, but also as a specific
diversity, so that one part, the Son, is that which is simple and
knows itself to be essential Being, while the other part is the
alienation, the externalization of being-for-self which lives only
to praise that Being; to this part, then, can be assigned the tak¬
ing back again of the externalized being-for-self and the with¬
drawal into self of the evil principle. In so far as the otherness
falls into two parts, Spirit might, as regards its moments—if
these are to be counted—be more exactly expressed as a qua-
ternity in unity or, because the quantity itself again falls into
two parts, viz. one part which has remained good and the other
which has become evil, might even be expressed as a five-in-
one. But to count the moments can be reckoned as altogether
useless, since in the first place what is differentiated is itself just
as much only one thing—viz. the thought of the difference which
is only one thought—as it [the differentiated] is this differenti¬
ated element, the second relatively to the first. And, secondly,
it is useless to count because the thought which grasps the Many
in a One must be dissolved out of its universality and differenti¬
ated into more than three or four distinct components; and this
universality appears, in contrast to the absolute determinate¬
ness of the abstract unit, the principle of number, as indeter¬
minateness with respect to number as such, so that we could
speak only of numbers in general, i.e. not of a specific number
of differences. Here, therefore, it is quite superfluous to think
of numbers and counting at all, just as in other respects the
mere difference ofquantity and amount has no notional signifi¬
cance and makes no difference.

777. Good and Evil were the specific differences yielded by
the thought of Spirit as immediately existent. Since their anti¬
thesis has not yet been resolved and they are conceived of as
the essence of thought, each of them having an independent
existence of its own, man is a self lacking any essential being
and is the synthetic ground of their existence and their conflict.
But these universal powers just as much belong to the self, or
the self is their actuality. In accordance with this moment, it
therefore comes to pass that, just as Evil is nothing other than


47 o C. (CC.) RELIGION

the self-centredness of the natural existence of Spirit, so, con¬
versely, Good enters into actuality and appears as an existent
self-consciousness. That which in the pure thought of Spirit is
in general merely hinted at as the othering of the divine Being,
here comes nearer to its realization for picture-thinking: this
realization consists for picture-thinking in the self-abasement
of the divine Being who renounces his abstract and non-actual
nature. Picture-thinking takes the other aspect, evil, to be a
happening alien to the divine Being; to grasp it in the divine
Being itself as the wrath of God , this demands from picture-think¬
ing, struggling against its limitations, its supreme and most
strenuous effort, an effort which, since it lacks the Notion,
remains fruitless.

778. The alienation of the divine Being is thus made explicit
in its twofold form: the Self of Spirit and its simple thought
are the two moments whose absolute unity is Spirit itself. Its
alienation consists in the moments going apart from one
another and in one of them having an unequal value compared
with the other. This disparity is therefore twofold, and two rela¬
tionships arise whose common moments are those just given.
In one of them, the divine Being counts as essence, while natural
existence and the Self count as the unessential aspect which is
to be superseded. In the other, on the contrary, being-for-self
counts as the essential and the simple, divine Being as unessen¬
tial. Their still empty middle term is existence in general, the
bare community of their two moments.

779 * This antithesis is resolved not so much through the con¬
flict between the two moments which are pictured as separate
and independent Beings: their very independence implies that
each of them in its own self, through its Notion, must resolve
itself. The conflict begins where both cease to be these minglings
of thought and of independent existence, and where they con¬
front each other only as thoughts. For then they are, as specific
Notions, only in the relation of an antithesis; as independent,
on the other hand, they have their essentiality outside of their
antithesis. Their movement is, therefore, their own free and
spontaneous movement. As, then, the movement of the two
sides is an intrinsic movement, since it is to be considered in the
sides themselves, it is initiated by that side which is determined
as possessing being-in-itself as contrasted with the other. This


THE REVEALED RELIGION 471

is depicted as a spontaneous act; but the necessity for its exter-
nalization lies in the Notion that being-in-itself, which is so de¬
termined in the antithesis, has just for that reason no genuine
subsistence. It is, therefore, that side which has not being-for-
self but simple being as its essence that alienates itself from itself,
yields to death, and thereby reconciles absolute essence with
itself. For, in this movement, it manifests itself as Spirit; abstract
essence is alienated from itself, it has natural existence and self¬
like actuality; this its otherness, or its sensuous presence, is taken
back again by the second othering and posited as superseded,
as universal. The [absolute] essence has thereby come to be its
own Self in its sensuous presence; the immediate existence of
actuality has ceased to be something alien and external for the
absolute essence, since that existence is superseded, is universal.
This death is, therefore, its resurrection as Spirit.

780. The transcended immediate presence of the self-con¬
scious essence has the form of universal self-consciousness. This
Notion of the transcended individual self that is absolute Being
immediately expresses, therefore, the establishing of a com¬
munity which, tarrying hitherto in the sphere of picture-think¬
ing, now returns into itself as the Self; and in doing this, Spirit
passes over from the second element constituting it, i.e. from
picture-thinking, into the third element, self-consciousness as
such. If we further consider the behaviour of picture-thinking
in its progress, we find first of all the declaration that the divine
Being takes on human nature. Here it is already asserted that
in themselves the two are not separate; likewise in the declaration
that the divine Bein gfrom the beginning externalizes itself, that
its existence withdraws into itself and becomes self-centred and
evil, implies, though it does not expressly assert, that this evil
existence is not in itself something alien to the divine Being.
Absolute Being would be but an empty name if in truth there
were for it an ‘other’, if there were a Tali’ from it; on the con¬
trary, the moment of being-within-self constitutes the essential
moment of the SelJ of Spirit. That this being-within-self and the
actuality which follows from it belong to absolute Being itself,
this which lor us is Notion , and in so far as it is Notion, appears
to the picture-thinking consciousness as an incomprehensible
happening; the in-itself assumes for it the form of indifferent being.
The thought that those moments of absolute Being and of the


472


C. (CC.) RELIGION


self-centred Self which seem to flee from each other are not
separate, also appears in this picture-thinking—for it does pos¬
sess the true content—but this picture-thought comes later, in
the externalization of the divine Being who is made flesh. The
picture-thought is in this way still immediate , and therefore not
spiritual, i.e. it knows the human form of the divine Being at
first only as a particular, not yet as a universal, form; it be¬
comes spiritual for this consciousness in the movement whereby
this divine Being in human shape sacrifices his immediate

existenceagainandreturnstothedivine Being: only when essence

is reflected into itself is it Spirit. In this picture-thought there
is depicted the reconciliation of the divine Being with its ‘other
in general, and specifically with the thought of it Evil. I
this reconciliation is notionally expressed by saying that it con
sists in the fact that Evil is in itself the same as Goodness, or
again that the divine Being is the same as Nature in its whole
extent, or that Nature separated from the divine Being is simply
nothing—we must regard this as an unspiritual way of talking
and one that is necessarily bound to give rise to misunderstand¬
ings. If Evil is the same as Goodness, then Evil is just not Evil,
nor Goodness Good: on the contrary, both are suspended
moments—Evil in general is self-centred being-for-self, and
Goodness is what is simple and without a self. When thus
expressed in terms of their Notion, their unity is at once evident,
for self-centred being-for-self is simple knowing, and simpl e
[being] that lacks a Self is equally pure self-centred being-for
self. If, therefore, it must be said, that according to this their
Notion, Good and Evil, i.e. in so far as they are not Good and
Evil, are the same , it must also no less emphatically be asserted
that they are n 6 t the same, but are utterly .different \ for simple
oeing-for-self, or pure knowing too, is each in its own sell
equally pure negativity or absolute difference. The whole is
only complete when the two propositions are made together,
and when the first is asserted and maintained, it must be
countered by clinging to the other with invincible stubbornness.
Since both are equally right, they are both equally wrong, and
the mistake consists in taking such abstract forms as ‘the same
and ‘not the same’, ‘identity’ and ‘non-identity’, to be some¬
thing true, fixed, and actual, and in resting on them. Neither
the one nor the other has truth ; the truth is just their movement


THE REVEALED RELIGION


473


in which simple sameness is an abstraction and hence absolute
difference, but this, as difference in itself, is distinguished from
itself and is therefore selfsameness. This is precisely the case with
the ‘selfsameness’ of the divine Being and Nature in general,
and human nature in particular: the former is Nature in so far
as it is not essential Being, and the latter is divine according
to its essence. But it is Spirit in which the truth of these two
abstract sides is made explicit, viz. by reducing them to
suspended moments, an explication which cannot be expressed
by the judgement and the lifeless ‘is’ which forms its copula.
Similarly, Nature is nothing apart from its essence; but this same
‘nothing’just as much is; it is an absolute abstraction, and thus
pure thought or being-within-self, and with the moment of its
antithesis to the spiritual unity it is Evil. The difficulty that is
found in these Notions stems solely from clinging to the ‘is’ and
forgetting the thinking of the Notions in which the moments
just as much are as they are not —are only the movement which
is Spirit. It is this spiritual unity, or the unity in which the dif¬
ferences are present only as moments or as suspended, which
has become explicit for the picture-thinking consciousness in
that reconciliation spoken of above; and since this unity is the
universality of self-consciousness, self-consciousness has ceased
to think in pictures: the movement has returned into self-con¬
sciousness.

781. Spirit is thus posited in the third element, in universal
self-consciousness; it is its community. The movement of the com¬
munity as self-consciousness that has distinguished itself from
its picture-thought is to make explicit what has been implicitly
established. The dead divine Man or human God is in himself
the universal self-consciousness; this he has to become explicitly
for this self-consciousness. Or, since this self-consciousness con¬
stitutes one side of the antithesis in picture-thought, viz. the
side of evil, for which natural existence and individual self-con¬
sciousness count as essence—this side which is pictured as inde¬
pendent, not yet as a moment, has on account of its indepen¬
dence to raise itself through its own nature to Spirit, i.e. it has
to exhibit in its own self the movement of Spirit.

782. This self-consciousness is natural Spirit ; the self has to
withdraw from this natural existence and retreat into itself,
which would mean, to become evil. But this side is already in



C. (CC.) RELIGION


474

itself evil ; its withdrawal into itself consists, therefore, in convinc¬
ing itself that natural existence is evil. For the consciousness that
thinks in pictures the world has actually become, and is, evil,
and the propitiation of the absolute Being was a real event;
but in self-consciousness as such, what is thus pictured as
happening, as an event, has as regards its form the significance
only of a suspended moment, for the self is the negative and
hence a knowing—a knowing that is a pure act within con¬
sciousness itself. This moment of the negative must likewise
express itself in the content. That is to say, since absolute Being
is already reconciled with itself in itself and is a spiritual unity
in which the parts of the picture-thought are suspended or are
moments, what is expressed in the content is that each part of
the picture-thought here receives the opposite meaning to what
it had before; each meaning thereby completes itself in the
other, and only through this self-completion is the content a
spiritual one; since the determinateness is just as much its oppo¬
site, unity in otherness, i.e. the spiritual relationship, is an
accomplished fact: just as the opposite meanings were united
previously for us, or in themselves, and even the abstract forms
of‘the same’ and ‘not the same’, of‘identity’ and ‘non-identity’
were reduced to moments.

783. then, in the picture-thinking consciousness the in-
wardizing of natural self-consciousness was the real existence of
evil, that inwardizing in the element of self-consciousness is the
knowledge of evil as something that is implicit in existence. This
knowledge is, of course, a genesis of evil, but only a genesis of
the thought of evil, and is therefore recognized as the first
moment of reconciliation. For as a withdrawal into itself from
the immediacy of Nature which is determined as evil, it is a
forsaking of that immediacy and a dying away of sin. It is not
natural existence as such that is forsaken by consciousness, but
natural existence that is at the same time known as evil. The
jrnrnediate movement of withdrawal into self is just as much a
mediated movement; it presupposes itself, or is its own ground:
that is to say, the ground of the withdrawal into self is that
jVfature has already withdrawn into itself; on account of evil,
man must withdraw into himself; but evil is itself the with¬
drawal into self This first movement is for that very reason only
immediate, or the simple Notion of that movement, because it



THE REVEALED RELIGION


475


is the same as what its ground is. The movement or othering
has therefore still to appear, but in its own more characteristic
form.

784. Besides this immediacy, therefore, the mediation of the
picture-thought is necessary. The knowledge of Nature as the un¬
true existence of Spirit, and this immanently developed uni¬
versality of the Self is in itself the reconciliation of Spirit with
itself. For the self-consciousness that does not think in terms of
the Notion, this in-itself receives the form of something that pos¬
sesses immediate being and is imaginatively represented. Com¬
prehension is, therefore, for that self-consciousness not a grasp¬
ing of this Notion which knows superseded natural existence
to be universal and therefore reconciled with itself; but rather
a grasping of the imaginative idea, that by bringing to pass its
own externalization, in its historical incarnation and death, the
divine Being has been reconciled with its [natural] existence.

The grasping of this idea now expresses more definitely what
was previously called the spiritual resurrection in this same con¬
text, i.e. the coming into existence of God’s individual self-con¬
sciousness as a universal self-consciousness, or as the religious
community. The death of the divine Man, as death , is abstract
negativity, the immediate result of the movement which ends
only in natural universality. Death loses this natural meaning
in spiritual self-consciousness, i.e. it comes to be its just stated
Notion ; death becomes transfigured from its immediate mean¬
ing, viz. the non-being of this particular individual, into the uni¬
versality of the Spirit who dwells in His community, dies in it
every day, and is daily resurrected.

785. Thus what belongs to the element of picture- thinking, viz.
that absolute Spirit qua individual, or rather qua particular,
Spirit, presents the nature of Spirit in its [natural] existence,
is here shifted into self-consciousness itself, into knowledge that
preserves itself in its otherness. This self-consciousness therefore
does not actually die, as the particular self-consciousness is
pictured as being actually dead, but its particularity dies away
in its universality, i.e. in its knowledge, which is essential Being
reconciling itself with itself. The immediately preceding ele¬
ment of picture-thinking is, therefore, here explicitly set aside,
or it has returned into the Self, into its Notion; what was in
the former merely in the element of being has become a Subject.



4?6 C. (CC.) RELIGION

By this very fact, the first element too, pure thinking and the
eternal Spirit therein, is no longer beyond the picturing con¬
sciousness or beyond the Self; on the contrary, the return into
itself of the whole is just this, to contain within itself all the
moments. The death of the xMediator as grasped by the Self
is the supersession of his objective existence or his particular
being-for-self: this particular being-for-self has become a uni¬
versal self-consciousness. On the other side, the universal has
become self-consciousness, just because of this, and the pure or
non-actual Spirit of mere thinking has become actual. The death
of the Mediator is the death not only of his natural aspect or
of his particular being-for-self, not only of the already dead husk
stripped of its essential Being, but also of the abstraction of the
divine Being. For the Mediator, in so far as his death has not
yet completed the reconciliation, is the one-sidedness which
takes as essential Being the simple element of thought in contrast
to actuality: this one-sided extreme of the Self does not as yet
have equal worth with essential Being; this it first has as Spirit.
The death of this picture-thought contains, therefore, at the
same time the death of the abstraction of the divine Being which
is not posited as Self. That death is the painful feeling of the
Unhappy Consciousness that God Himself is dead. This hard say¬
ing is the expression of innermost simple self-knowledge, the
return of consciousness into the depths of the night in which
T = T, a night which no longer distinguishes or knows any¬
thing outside of it. This feeling is, in fact, the loss of substance
and of its appearance over against consciousness; but it is at
the same time the pure subjectivity of substance, or the pure
certainty of itself which it lacked when it was object, or the im¬
mediate, or pure essence. This Knowing is the inbreathing of
the Spirit, whereby Substance becomes Subject, by which its
abstraction and lifelessness have died, and Substance therefore
has become actual and simple and universal Self-conscious¬
ness.

786. In this way, therefore, Spirit is self-knowing Spirit; it
knows itself ; that which is object for it, is, or its picture-thought
is the true, absolute content', as we saw, it expressed Spirit itself.
It is at the same time not merely the content of self-conscious¬
ness, and not merely object for it, but it is also actual Spirit. This
it is because it runs through the three elements of its nature;


THE REVEALED RELIGION


477


the movement through its own phases constitutes its actuality.
What moves itself, that is Spirit; it is the Subject of the move¬
ment and is equally the moving itself, or the substance through
which the Subject moves. The Notion of Spirit which had
emerged for us as we entered the sphere of religion, viz. as the
movement of self-certain Spirit which forgives evil and in so
doing abandons its own simple unitary nature and rigid un¬
changeableness p or as the movement in which what is in an
absolute antithesis recognizes itself as the same as its opposite,
this recognition bursting forth as the affirmative between these
extremes—this Notion is intuitively apprehended by the religious
consciousness to which the absolute Being is revealed, and
which overcomes the difference between its Self and what it
intuitively apprehends; just as it is Subject, so also it is sub¬
stance, and hence it is itself Spirit just because and in so far
as it is this movement.

787. But the community is not yet perfected in this its self-
consciousness; in general, its content exists for it in the form
of picture-thinking, and the duality in this thinking still attaches
even to the actual spirituality of the community, to its return out
of its picture-thinking; just as the element of pure thought itself
was burdened with it. The community also does not possess the
consciousness of what it is; it is spiritual self-consciousness which
is not an object to itself as this self-consciousness, or which does
not unfold itself to a consciousness of itself; but rather, in so far
as it is consciousness, it has those picture-thoughts which we
have considered. We see self-consciousness at its last turning-
point become inward to itself and attain to a knowledge of its in¬
wardness ; we see it divest itself of its natural existence and
acquire pure negativity. But the positive meaning, viz. that this
negativity or pure inwardness of knowledge is just as much the
self-identical essence—or in other words, that substance has
here succeeded in becoming absolute self-consciousness—this
is an ‘other’ for the devotional consciousness. It grasps this
aspect, viz. that the pure inwardization of knowledge is in itself
absolute simplicity or substance, as the picture-thought of
something which is so, not in virtue of its Notion, but as the
deed of an alien satisfaction. In other words, it does not grasp
the fact that this depth of the pure Self is the power by which
the abstract divine Being is drawn down from its abstraction and



478


C. (CC.) RELIGION


raised to a Self by the power of this pure devotion. The action
of the Self retains towards it this negative meaning because the
externalization, the kenosis of substance, is taken by the Self
to be an action implicit in the nature of substance; the Self
does not grasp and truly comprehend it, or does not find it in
its own action as such. This unity of essence and the Self having
been implicitly achieved, consciousness, too, still has this picture-
thought of its reconciliation, but as a picture-thought. It obtains
satisfaction by externally attaching to its pure negativity the posi¬
tive meaning of the unity of itself with the essential Being; its
satisfaction thus itself remains burdened with the antithesis of
a beyond. Its own reconciliation therefore enters its conscious¬
ness as something distant , as something in the distant future , just
as the reconciliation which the other Self achieved appears as
something in the distant past. Just as the individual divine Man
has a father in principle and only an actual mother, so too the
universal divine Man, the community, has for its father its own
doing and knowing, but for its mother, eternal love which it
only feels , but does not behold in its consciousness as an actual,
immediate object. Its reconciliation, therefore, is in its heart, but
its consciousness is still divided against itself and its actual world
is still disrupted. What enters its consciousness as the in-itself,
or the side of pure mediation, is a reconciliation that lies in the
beyond: but what enters it as present , as the side of immediacy
and existence , is the world which has still to await its transfigura¬
tion. The world is indeed implicitly reconciled with the divine
Being; and regarding the divine Being it is known, of course,
that it recognizes the object as no longer alienated from it but
as identical with it in its love. But for self-consciousness, this
immediate presence still has not the shape of Spirit. The Spirit
of the community is thus in its immediate consciousness divided
from its religious consciousness, which declares, it is true, that
in themselves they are not divided, but this merely implicit unity
is not realized, or has not yet become an eq ually absolute being-
for-self.


(DD.) ABSOLUTE KNOWING
