VIII. ABSOLUTE KNOWING


788. The Spirit of the revealed religion has not yet sur¬
mounted its consciousness as such, or what is the same, its actual
self-consciousness is not the object of its consciousness; Spirit
itself as a whole, and the self-differentiated moments within it,
fall within the sphere of picture-thinking and in the form of
objectivity. The content of this picture-thinking is absolute
Spirit; and all that now remains to be done is to supersede this
mere form, or rather, since this belongs to consciousness as such ,
its truth must already have yielded itself in the shape of con¬
sciousness. This surmounting of the object of consciousness is
not to be taken one-sidedly to mean that the object showed itself
as returning into the Self, but is to be taken more specifically
to mean not only that the object as such presented itself to the
Self as vanishing, but rather that it is the externalization of self-
consciousness that posits the thinghood [of the object] and that
this externalization has not merely a negative but a positive
meaning, a meaning which is not only for us or in itself, but
for self-consciousness itself. The negative of the object, or its
self-supersession, has a positive meaning for self-consciousness,
i.e. self-consciousness knows the nothingness of the object, on
the one hand, because it externalizes its own self—for in this
externalization it posits itself as object, or the object as itself,
in virtue of the indivisible unity of being-for-self. On the other
hand, this positing at the same time contains the other moment,
viz. that self-consciousness has equally superseded this external¬
ization and objectivity too, and taken it back into itself so that
it is in communion with itself in its otherness as such. This is
the movement of consciousness, and in that movement conscious¬
ness is the totality of its moments. Equally, consciousness must
have related itself to the object in accordance with the totality
of the latter’s determinations and have thus grasped it from the
standpoint of each of them. This totality of its determinations
establishes the object as an implicitly spiritual being, and it does



4 8o C. (DD.) ABSOLUTE KNOWING

truly become a spiritual being for consciousness when each of
its individual determinations is grasped as a determination of
the Self, or through the spiritual relationship to them that was
just mentioned.

789. Thus the object is in part immediate being or, in general,
a Thing—corresponding to immediate consciousness; in part,
an othering of itself, its relationship or being-for-an-other , and
being-jor-itself\ i.e. determinateness—corresponding to percep¬
tion; and in part essence , or in the form of a universal—corre¬
sponding to the Understanding. It is, as a totality, a syllogism
or the movement of the universal through determination to in¬
dividuality, as also the reverse movement from individuality
through superseded individuality, or through determination,
to the universal. It is, therefore, in accordance with these three
determinations that consciousness must know the object as
itself. However, this Knowing of which we are speaking is not
Knowing as pure comprehension of the object [i.e. in terms of
the Notion]; here, this Knowing is to be indicated only in its
process of coming-to-be, or in the moments of that aspect of
it which belongs to consciousness as such, the moments of the
Notion proper or of pure Knowing in the form of shapes of con¬
sciousness. For this reason the object does not yet appear in con¬
sciousness as such as the spiritual essentiality we have just
affirmed it to be; and the relationship of consciousness to it is
not the consideration of it in this totality as such nor in its pure
form as Notion; but it is from one side a shape of consciousness
as such, and from the other side a number of such shapes which
we bring together, in which the totality of the moments of the
object and of the relation of consciousness to it can be indicated
only as resolved into its moments.

790. for this aspect of the apprehension of the object, i.e.
as it exists in the shape of consciousness, we have only to recall
the earlier shapes of consciousness already encountered. Thus,
in regard to the object so far as it is an immediacy, i.e. is an
indifferent being , we saw Observing Reason seeking and finding
itself in this indifferent thing, i.e. we saw it equally conscious
of its action being external to it, as it was conscious of the object
only as an immediate object. And we saw Observing Reason
at its peak express its specific character in the infinite judgement
that the being of the 1 V is a Thing, and, moreover, a sensuous


ABSOLUTE KNOWING


481


immediate Thing. When the T is called soul, it is true that it
is also represented as a Thing, but as something invisible, in¬
tangible, etc., and therefore in fact not as an immediate being
and not as what is meant by a Thing. That judgement, taken
just as it stands, is non-spiritual or rather is the non-spiritual
itself. In its Notion, however, it is in fact the most richly spirit¬
ual, and this inner significance of what is not yet apparent is what
is expressed in the two other moments to be considered.

791. The Thing is T; in point of fact, in this infinite judge¬
ment the Thing is superseded; in itself it is nothing; it has mean¬
ing only in the relation, only through the ( T and its connection with
it. This moment manifested itself for consciousness in pure in¬
sight and enlightenment. Things are simply useful and to be con¬
sidered only from the standpoint of utility. The cultivated self-
consciousness which has traversed the world of self-alienated
Spirit has, through its self-alienation, produced the Thing as
its own self; therefore, it still retains its own self in it and knows
that the Thing lacks self-subsistence, that it is essentially only
a being-for-an-other ; or, to give complete expression to the rela¬
tionship, i.e., to what alone constitutes the nature of the object
here, the Thing counts for it as something that exists on its own
account ; it declares sense-certainty to be absolute truth, but this
being-for-self is itself declared to be a moment that merely
vanishes and passes over into its opposite, into a being that is
at the disposal of an ‘other’.

792. However, at this stage, knowledge of the Thing is still
not complete; it must be known not only from the standpoint
of the immediacy of being and of determinateness, but also as
essence or inner being , as Self. This occurs in moral self-consciousness.
This is aware that its knowledge is a knowledge of what is abso¬
lutely essential , it knows that being is simply and solely pure wil¬
ling and knowing; it is nothing else but this willing and know¬
ing; anything else has only unessential being, i.e. not intrinsic
being, only its empty husk. In the same measure that moral
self-consciousness lets determinate being go free from the Self, so
too, in its conception of the world it takes it back again into
itself. Finally, as conscience, it is no longer this continual
alternation of existence being placed in the Self, and vice versa ;
it knows that its existence as such is this pure certainty of itself.
The objective element into which it puts itself forth, when



482 C. (DD.) ABSOLUTE KNOWING

it acts, is nothing other than the Self’s pure knowledge of
itself.

793. These are the moments of which the reconciliation of
Spirit with its own consciousness proper is composed; by them¬
selves they are single and separate, and it is solely their spiritual
unity that constitutes the power of this reconciliation. The last
of these moments is, however, necessarily this unity itself and,
as is evident, it binds them all into itself. The Spirit that, in
its existence, is certain of itself, has for the element of existence
nothing else but this knowledge of itself; when it declares that
what it does it does out of a conviction of duty, this utterance
is the validating of its action. Action is the first implicit sundering
ofthesimpleunity of the Notion and the return out of this divided¬
ness. This first movement changes round into the second, since
this element of recognition posits itself, as simple knowledge of
duty, in antithesis to the distinction and dichotomy that lie in
action as such and so constitute a stubborn actuality confront¬
ing action. But in forgiveness, we saw how this obstinacy sur¬
renders and renounces itself. Here, therefore, actuality as well
as immediate existence has for self-consciousness no other sig¬
nificance than that of being a pure knowing; similarly,
as determinate existence or as relation, what is self-opposed
is a knowing, partly of this purely individual Self, partly of
knowledge as universal. In this is posited at the same time
that the third moment, the universality or essence , counts only as
knowledge for each of the two sides that stand over against
each other; and finally these latter equally resolve the empty
antithesis still remaining and are the knowledge of T = ‘r;
this individual Self which is immediately a pure knowing or a
universal.

794 - This reconciliation of consciousness with self-conscious¬
ness thus shows itself as brought about from two sides; on one
side, in the religious Spirit, and on the other side, in conscious¬
ness itself as such. The difference between them is that in the
ormer this reconciliation is in the form of being -in-itself or
lC ff. and in the latter in the explicit form of being-
u l In ° Ur consider ation of them they at first fall apart. In
t e ot er in which the shapes of consciousness came before us,
consciousness reached the individual moments of those shapes
an t eir unification long before ever religion gave its object


ABSOLUTE KNOWING


483


the shape of actual self-consciousness. The unification of the two
sides has not yet been exhibited; it is this that closes the series
of the shapes of Spirit, for in it Spirit attains to a knowledge
of itself not only as it is in itself or as possessing an absolute content ,
nor only as it is for itself as a form devoid of content, or as the
aspect of self-consciousness, but as it is both in essence and in actu¬
ality , or in and for itself

795. This unification has, however, already occurred in prin¬
ciple and that, too, in religion, in the return of picture-thinking
into self-consciousness, but not according to the proper form,
for the religious aspect is the aspect of the in-itself which stands
over against the movement of self-consciousness. Consequently,
the unification belongs to this other aspect which, in the con¬
trast of the two sides, is the aspect of reflection into self, and
therefore the one that contains both its own self and its opposite,
and not only implicitly or in a universal sense, but explicitly or
in a developed and differentiated way. The content, as well as
the other aspect of self-conscious Spirit so far as it is the
other aspect, has been exhibited and is before us in its com¬
pleteness; the unification that is still lacking is the simple unity
of the Notion. The Notion, too, is itself already present on the
side of self-consciousness. But as it has come before us thus far,
it has to be a particular shape of consciousness like all the other
moments. It is, therefore, that aspect of the shape of self-assured
Spirit that abides within its Notion and was called the ‘beautiful
soul’. The ‘beautiful soul 5 is its own knowledge of itself in its
pure, transparent unity—the self-consciousness that knows this
pure knowledge of pure inwardness as Spirit. It is not only the
intuition of the Divine but the Divine’s intuition of itself. Since
this Notion holds itself firmly opposed to its realization, it is
the one-sided shape which we saw vanish into thin air, but also
positively externalize itself and move onward. Through this
realization, this objectless self-consciousness ceases to cling to
the determinateness of the Notion as against its fulfilment ; its self-
consciousness gains the form of universality and what remains
to it is its true Notion, or the Notion that has attained its realiza¬
tion; it is the Notion in its truth, viz. in unity with its external-
ization; it is the knowing of pure knowledge, not as an abstract
essence such as duty is, but of knowledge as an essential being
which is this knowledge, this pure self-consciousness which is,



C. (DD.) ABSOLUTE KNOWING


484

therefore, at the same time a genuine object , for the Notion is
the Self that is for itself.

796. This Notion fulfilled itself on one side in the self-assured
Spirit that acted, and on the other, in religion: in religion it won
for consciousness the absolute content as content or, in the form
of picture-thinking, the form of otherness for consciousness; on
the other hand, in the prior shape the form is that of the Self
itself, for it contains the self-assured Spirit that acts ; the Self
accomplishes the life of absolute Spirit. This shape is, as we have
seen, that simple Notion which, however, surrenders its eternal
essence, it is there [in the real world], or it acts. The self-sundering
or stepping-forth into existence stems from the purity of the
Notion, for this is absolute abstraction or negativity. Similarly,
the Notion gets the element of its actuality or the being it con¬
tains in pure knowledge itself, for this is simple immediacy, which
is as much being and existence as it is essence; the former, nega¬
tive thought, the latter, positive thought itself. Finally, this ex¬
istence, both as existence and as duty, is just as much the reflec-

tedness into self out of pure knowledge_or the state of evil-

This withdrawal into itselfconstitutes the antithesis of the Notion,
and is thus the emergence of the pure knowledge of the essence,
the knowing that does not act and is not actual. But this emergence
in the antithesis is participation in it; the pure knowledge of
essence has in principle renounced its simple unity, for it is the
self-sundering, or the negativity which the Notion is; so far as
this self-sundering is the process of becoming/or itself, it is evil;
so far as it is the in-itself it remains good. Now, what at fir st
happens in principle is at the same time explicitly for conscious¬
ness, and is thus double: it is both for consciousness and also is
its being-for-self or its very own act. The same thing that is
already posited in principle now therefore repeats itself as con¬
sciousness’s knowledge of it and conscious act. Each in relation
to the other lets go of the independent determinateness with
which it comes forth against it. This letting-go is the same
renunciation of the one-sidedness of the Notion that in itself
constituted the beginning; but it is now its own act of renuncia¬
tion, just as the Notion which it renounces is its own Notion.
That in-itself [i.e. the immediacy] of the beginning is in truth,
as negativity, no less mediated-, what it is in truth, it now also
makes explicit, and the negative is, as delerminaleness of each both








4 8 5


absolute knowing


for the other and in itself, self-suspending. One of the two parts
of the antithesis is the disparity between the Notion s being
wit hin itself in its individuality , and universality; the other, the
disparity between its abstract universality and the Self. I he
former dies to its being-for-self, disowns itself, makes confession ;
the latter renounces the obstinacy of its abstract universality,
and in so doing dies to its lifeless Self and to its unmoved uni¬
versality; the former has thus completed itself through the
moment of universality which is essence, and the latter t roug
the universality which is Self. Through this movement of action,
Spirit has come on the scene as a pure universality of knowing,
which is self-consciousness, as self-consciousness that is the
simple unity of knowing. It is only through action that Spirit
is in such a way that it is really there , that is, when it raises its
existence into Thought and thereby into an absolute antithesis r,
and returns out of this antithesis, in and through the antithesis


797. Thus, what in religion was content or a form for present¬
ing an other , is here the Selfs own act; the Notion requires the
content to be the Selfs own act. For this Notion is, as we see,
the knowledge of the Self's act within itself as all essentiality
and all existence, the knowledge of this subject as substance
and of the substance as this knowledge of its act. Our own act
here has been simply to gather together the separate moments,
each of which in principle exhibits the life of Spirit in its en¬
tirety, and also to stick to the Notion in the form of the Notion,
the content of which would already have yielded itself in those
moments and in the form of a shape of consciousness.

798. This last shape of Spirit—the Spirit which at the same
time gives its complete and true content the form of the Self
and thereby realizes its Notion as remaining in its Notion in
this realization—this is absolute knowing; it is Spirit that knows
itself in the shape of Spirit, or a comprehensive knowing [in terms
of the Notion]. Truth is not only in itself completely identical
with certainty, but it also has the shape of self-certainty, or it
is in its existence in the form of self-knowledge. Truth is the
content , which in religion is still not identical with its certainty.
But this identity is now a fact, in that the content has received
the shape of the Self. As a result, that which is the very essence,
viz. the Notion, has become the element of existence, or has



4 86


C. (DD.) ABSOLUTE KNOWING


become the form of objectivity for consciousness. Spirit, manifesting
or appearing in consciousness in this element, or what is the same
thing, produced in it by consciousness, is Science.

799. The nature, moments and movement of this knowing
have, then, shown themselves to be such that this knowing is a
pure being-for-self of self-consciousness; it is T, that is this and no
other T, and which is no less immediately a mediated or super¬
seded universaW. It has content which it differentiates from itself;
for it is pure negativity or the dividing of itself, it is consciousness.
This content is, in its difference, itself the T, for it is the move¬
ment of superseding itself, or the same pure negativity that the
‘I’ is. In it, as differentiated, the T’ is reflected into itself; it
is only when the T 5 communes with itself in its otherness that
the content is comprehended [i.e. in terms of the Notion]. Stated
more specifically, this content is nothing else than the very
movement just spoken of; for the content is Spirit that traverses
its own self and does so for itself as Spirit by the fact that it has
the ‘shape’ of the Notion in its objectivity.

800. But as regards the existence of this Notion, Science does
not appear in Time and in the actual world before Spirit has
attained to this consciousness about itself. As Spirit that knows
what it is, it does not exist before, and nowhere at all, till after
the completion of its work of compelling its imperfect ‘shape’
to procure for its consciousness the ‘shape’ of its essence, and
in this way to equate its self-consciousness with its consciousness.
Spirit that is in and for itself and differentiated into its moments
is a knowing that is for itself, a comprehension in general that, as
such, substance has not yet reached, i.e. substance is not in
its own self an absolute knowing.

801. Now, in actuality, the substance that knows exists
ear ler than its form or its Notion-determined ‘shape’. For sub¬
stance is the as yet undeveloped in-itself or the Ground and

otion in its still unmoved simplicity, and therefore the inward¬
ness or the Self of the Spirit that does not yet exist. What is there ,
exists as the still undeveloped simple and immediate, or as the
oject of theconsciousness j n general. Cognition,
ecausc it is the spiritual consciousness for which what is in itself
on y is, in so far as it is a being for the Self and a being of the
• e /or Notion, has for this reason at first only a meagre object,
in contrast with which substance and the consciousness of this


ABSOLUTE KNOWING


487

substance are richer. The disclosure or revelation which sub¬
stance has in this consciousness is in fact concealment, for sub¬
stance is still self-less being and what is disclosed to it is only the
certainty of itself. At first, therefore, only the abstract moments
of substance belong to ^//'-consciousness; but since these, as
pure movements, spontaneously impel themselves onward, self-
consciousness enriches itself till it has wrested from conscious¬
ness the entire substance and has absorbed into itself the entire
structure of the essentialities of substance. And, since this nega¬
tive attitude to objectivity is just as much positive, it is a posit¬
ing, it has produced them out of itself, and in so doing has at
the same time restored them for consciousness. In the Notion
that knows itself as Notion, the moments thus appear earlier than
the filled [or fulfilled] whole whose coming-to-be is the movement
of those moments. In consciousness , on the other hand, the whole,
though uncomprehended, is prior to the moments. Time is the
Notion itself that is there and which presents itself to conscious¬
ness as empty intuition; for this reason, Spirit necessarily
appears in Time, and it appears in Time just so long as it has
not grasped its pure Notion, i.e. has not annulled Time. It is
the outer , intuited pure Self which is not grasped by the Self, the
merely intuited Notion; when this latter grasps itself it sets aside
its Time-form, comprehends this intuiting, and is a compre¬
hended and comprehending intuiting. Time, therefore, appears
as the destiny and necessity of Spirit that is not yet complete
within itself, the necessity to enrich the share which self-con¬
sciousness has in consciousness, to set in motion the immediacy
of the in-itself which is the form in which substance is present
in consciousness; or conversely, to realize and reveal what is
at first only inward (the in-itself being taken as what is inward ),
i.e. to vindicate it for Spirit’s certainty of itself.

802. For this reason it must be said that nothing is known
that is not in experience , or, as it is also expressed, that is not
felt to be true , not given as an inwardly revealed eternal verity, as
something sacred that is believed , or whatever other expressions
have been used. For experience is just this, that the content—
which is Spirit—is in itself substance, and therefore an object
of consciousness. But this substance which is Spirit is the process
in which Spirit becomes what it is in itself \ and it is only as this
process of reflecting itself into itself that it is in itself truly Spirit.



4 88


C. (DD.) ABSOLUTE KNOWING


It is in itself the movement which is cognition—the transform¬
ing of that in-itself into that which is for itself ‘ of Substance into
Subject, of the object of consciousness into an object of self-con¬
sciousness, i.e. into an object that is just as much superseded,
or into the Notion. The movement is the circle that returns into
itself, the circle that presupposes its beginning and reaches it
only at the end. Hence, so far as Spirit is necessarily this
immanent differentiation, its intuited whole appears over
against its simple self-consciousness, and since, then, the former
is what is differentiated, it is differentiated into its intuited pure
Notion, into Time and into the content or into the in-itself Sub¬
stance is charged, as Subject, with the at first only inward neces¬
sity of setting forth within itself what it is in itself of exhibiting
itself as Spirit. Only when the objective presentation is complete
is it at the same time the reflection of substance or the process
in which substance becomes Self. Consequently, until Spirit has
completed itself in itself until it has completed itself as world-
Spirit, it cannot reach its consummation as self-conscious Spirit.
Therefore, the content of religion proclaims earlier in time
than does Science, what Spirit is, but only Science is its true
knowledge of itself.

803. The movement of carrying forward the form of its self-
nowledge is the labour which it accomplishes as actual His¬
tory. The religious community, so far as it is at first the sub¬
stance of absolute Spirit, is the uncultivated consciousness
w ose existence is all the harsher and more barbarous the
eeper its inner Spirit is, and the deeper its Spirit is, the harder
the task that its torpid Self has with its essence, with the alien
content ot its consciousness. Not until consciousness has given
up ope of overcoming that alienation in an external, i.e. alien,
manner does it turn to itself, because the overcoming of that
alienation is the return into self-consciousness; not until then
oes it turn to its own present world and discover it as its prop¬
erty, thus taking the first step towards coming down out of the
intellectual world , or rather towards quickening the abstract ele¬
ment of that world with the actual Self. Through Observation
it finds, on the one hand, existence in the shape of Thought
and comprehends it, and, conversely, in its thinking it compre¬
hends existence. When, to begin with, it has thus expressed the
immediate unity of Thought and Being, the unity of abstract


ABSOLUTE KNOWING


489


essence and the Self, abstractly; and when it has expressed the
primal Light in a purer form, viz. as unity of extension and
being—for extension is the simple unity which more nearly
resembles pure thought than light does—and in so doing has
revived in thought the Substance of the Orient, Spirit at once
recoils in horror from the abstract unity, from this self-less sub¬
stantiality, and against it affirms individuality. But only after
it has externalized this individuality in the sphere of culture,
thereby giving it an existence, and establishing it throughout
the whole of existence—only after Spirit has arrived at the
thought of utility, and in its absolute freedom has grasped exist¬
ence as its will, only then does it turn the thought of its inmost
depths outwards and enunciate essence as ‘I’ — ‘I’. But this T =
T is the movement which reflects itself into itself; for since this
identity, being absolute negativity, is absolute difference, the
self-identity of the ‘I’ stands over against this pure difference
which, as pure and at the same time objective to the self-know¬
ing Self, has to be expressed as Time. So that, just as previously
essence was declared to be the unity of Thought and Extension,
it would now have to be grasped as the unity of Thought and
Time. But the difference left to itself, unresting and unhalting
Time, collapses rather within itself; it is the objective repose
of extension, while extension is pure identity with itself, the T.
In other words, the ‘I’ is not merely the Self, but the identity
of the Self with itself ; but this identity is complete and immediate
oneness with Self, or this Subject is just as much Substance. Sub¬
stance, just by itself, would be intuition devoid of content, or
the intuition of a content which, as determinate, would be only
accidental and would lack necessity. Substance would pass for
the Absolute only in so far as it was thought or intuited as abso¬
lute unity ; and all content would, as regards its diversity, have
to fall outside of it into Reflection ; and Reflection does not per¬
tain to Substance, because Substance would not be Subject,
would not be grasped as reflecting on itself and reflecting itself
into itself, would not be grasped as Spirit. If a content were
to be spoken of anyway, it would, on the one hand, only be
spoken of in order to cast it into the empty abyss of the Absolute,
and on the other, it would be a content picked up in external
fashion from sense-perception. Knowledge would seem to have
come by things, by what is different from itself, and by the dif-



490


C. (DD.) ABSOLUTE KNOWING


ference of a variety of things, without comprehending how and
whence they came.

804. Spirit, however, has shown itself to us to be neither
merely the withdrawal of self-consciousness into its pure in¬
wardness, nor the mere submergence of self-consciousness into
substance, and the non-being of its [moment of] difference; but
Spirit is this movement of the Self which empties itself of itself
and sinks itself into its substance, and also, as Subject, has gone
out of that substance into itself, making the substance into an
object and a content at the same time as it cancels this difference
between objectivity and content. That first reflection out of
immediacy is the Subject’s differentiation of itself from its sub¬
stance, or the Notion’s separation of itself from itself, the with¬
drawal into itself and the becoming of the pure T’. Since this
difference is the pure act of T = T, the Notion is the necessity
and the uprising of existence , which has substance for its essence
and subsists on its own account. But this subsistence of existence
on its own account is the Notion posited in determinateness and
is thus also its immanent movement, that of going down into the
simple substance, which is Subject only as this negativity and
movement. The ‘I’ has neither to cling to itself in the form of
self-consciousness as against the form of substantiality and objec¬
tivity, as if it were afraid of the externalization of itself: the
power of Spirit lies rather in remaining the selfsame Spirit
in its externalization and, as that which is both in itself and
for itself , in making its being-for-self no less merely a
moment than its in-itself; nor is Spirit a tertium quid that casts
the differences back into the abyss of the Absolute and declares
that therein they are all the same; on the contrary, knowing
is this seeming inactivity which merely contemplates how what
is differentiated spontaneously moves in its own self and returns
into its unity.

805. In this knowing, then, Spirit has concluded the move¬
ment in which it has shaped itself, in so far as this shaping was
burdened with the difference of consciousness [i.e. of the latter
from its object], a difference now overcome. Spirit has won the
pure element of its existence, the Notion. The content, in ac¬
cordance with th e freedom of its being, is the self-alienating Self,
or the immediate unity of self-knowledge. The pure movement
of this alienation, considered in connection with the content,


ABSOLUTE KNOWING


49


constitutes the necessity of the content. The distinct content, as
determinate , is in relation, is not ‘in itself; it is its own restless
process of superseding itself, or negativity ; therefore, negativity
or diversity, like free being, is also the Self; and in this self-
lik eform in which existence is immediately thought, the content
is the Notion. Spirit, therefore, having won the Notion, displays
its existence and movement in this ether of its life and is Science .
In this, the moments of its movement no longer exhibit them¬
selves as specific shapes of consciousness , but—since consciousness’s
difference has returned into the Self—as specific Notions and as
their organic self-grounded movement. Whereas in the pheno¬
menology of Spirit each moment is the difference of knowledge
and Truth, and is the movement in which that difference is
cancelled, Science on the other hand does not contain this dif¬
ference and the cancelling of it. On the contrary, since the
moment has the form of the Notion, it unites the objective form
of Truth and of the knowing Self in an immediate unity. The
moment does not appear as this movement of passing back and
forth, from consciousness or picture-thinking into self-con¬
sciousness, and conversely: on the contrary, its pure shape,
freed from its appearance in consciousness, the pure Notion and
its onward movement, depends solely on its pure determinateness.
Conversely, to each abstract moment of Science corresponds
a shape of manifest Spirit as such. Just as Spirit in its existence
is not richer than Science, so too it is not poorer either in con¬
tent. To know the pure Notions of Science in this form of shapes
of consciousness constitutes the side of their reality, in accord¬
ance with which their essence, the Notion, which is posited in
them in its simple mediation as thinking , breaks asunder the
moments of this mediation and exhibits itself in accordance
with the inner antithesis.

806. Science contains within itself this necessity of externa¬
lizing the form of the Notion, and it contains the passage of
the Notion into consciousness. For the self-knowing Spirit, just
because it grasps its Notion, is the immediate identity with itself
which, in its difference, is the certainty of immediacy , or sense-con¬
sciousness —the beginning from which we started. This release
of itself from the form of its Self is the supreme freedom and
assurance of its self-knowledge.

807. Yet this externalization is still incomplete; it expresses



492


C. (DD.) ABSOLUTE KNOWING

the connection of its self-certainty with the object which, just
because it is thus connected, has not yet won its complete free¬
dom. The seif-knowing Spirit knows not only itself but also the
negative of itself, or its limit: to know one’s limit is to know
how to sacrifice oneself. This sacrifice is the externalization in
which Spirit displays the process of its becoming Spirit in the
form of free contingent happening , intuiting its pure Self as Time
outside of it, and equally its Being as Space. This last becoming
of Spirit, Nature , is its living immediate Becoming; Nature, the
externalized Spirit, is in its existence nothing but this eternal
externalization of its continuing existence and the movement
which reinstates the Subject.

808. But the other side of its Becoming, History , is a conscious,
self -mediating process—Spirit emptied out into Time; but this
externalization, this kenosis, is equally an externalization of
itself; the negative is the negative of itself. This Becoming
presents a slow-moving succession of Spirits, a gallery of images,
each ofwhich, endowed with all the riches of Spirit, moves thus
slowly just because the Self has to penetrate and digest this
entire wealth of its substance. As its fulfilment consists in per¬
fectly knowing what it is , in knowing its substance, this knowing
is its withdrawal into itself in which it abandons its outer existence
and gives its existential shape over to recollection. Thus
absorbed in itself, it is sunk in the night of its self-consciousness,
but in that night its vanished outer existence is preserved, and
this transformed existence—the former one, but now reborn of
the Spirit’s knowledge—is the new existence, a new world and
a new shape of Spirit. In the immediacy of this new existence
the Spirit has to start afresh to bring itself to maturity as if,
for it, all that preceded were lost and it had learned nothing
from the experience of the earlier Spirits. But recollection, the
inwardizing , of that experience, has preserved it and is the inner
being, and in fact the higher form of the substance. So
although this Spirit starts afresh and apparently from its own
resources to bring itself to maturity, it is none the less on a higher
level that it starts. The realm of Spirits which is formed in this
way in the outer world constitutes a succession in Time in which
one Spirit relieved another of its charge and each took over the
empire of the world from its predecessor. Their goal is the
revelation of the depth of Spirit, and this is the absolute Notion.


ABSOLUTE KNOWING


493


This revelation is, therefore, the raising-up of its depth, or its
extension , the negativity of this withdrawn T, a negativity which
is its externalization or its substance; and this revelation is also
the Notion’s Time, in that this externalization is in its own self
externalized, and just as it is in its extension, so it is equally
in its depth, in the Self. The goal , Absolute Knowing, or Spirit
that knows itself as Spirit, has for its path the recollection ot
the Spirits as they are in themselves and as they accomplish
the organization of their realm. Their preservation, regarded
from the side of their free existence appearing in the form of con¬
tingency, is History; but regarded from the side of their [philo¬
sophically] comprehended organization, it is the Science of
Knowing in the sphere of appearance: 1 the two together, com¬
prehended History, form alike the inwardizing and the Calvary
of absolute Spirit, the actuality, truth, and certainty of his
throne, without which he would be lifeless and alone. Only

from the chalice of this realm of spirits

foams forth for Him his own infinitude. 2

1 Phenomenology.

2 Adaptation of Schiller’s Die Freundschaft , ad Jin.









.


.




'
















ANALYSIS OF THE TEXT




1. It is impossible to begin a philosophical work with a clear state¬
ment of the kind of view it hopes to establish, or of its relation to what
others have written. For philosophy aims at a universality which will
embrace and sum up particulars, and cannot be expressed till those
particulars have been gone through, and have yielded up the uni¬
versality in question. It cannot be anatomized in advance, without
seeing how its parts function in the whole.

2. To state the relation of a philosophical work to others is also
misleading, in that it suggests that previous works were false, and have
now been cancelled out in truth. But philosophical systems do not
replace falsehood by truth: they represent the ever clearer develop¬
ment of truth, which is as much present in earlier forms as in later,
and which is only complete in a total development which includes
all earlier stages.

3. A statement of philosophical aims and results is only legitimate
if it is seen as being initial and superficial, and is not regarded as
revealing the essence of the matter in hand. For this essence is not
exhausted by aims, but by the way in which they are carried out.

It is not concerned with mere results, but with the manner in which
they emerge. To state results without saying how one arrives at them
is to present the corpse of a system, whereas merely to differentiate
a system from others is to remain resolutely on its fringes.

4. General principles and points of view belong only to the begin¬
nings of the life of thought. Once one’s mind has become deeply
immersed in its subject-matter, they will be relegated to surface-talk.

5. Philosophical truth can only exist in the form of a fully-worked-
out scientific system. Philosophy must show up the inner necessity that
drives knowledge towards Science, and it must itselfembody this drive
when the appropriate moment arrives.

6. The true shape of truth is conceptual and notional. This can
at present only be asserted as a counter to views like those of Jacobi
(Studies in Spinoza , 1779) »NovaIis,Schlegel, etc., which make direct, un-
reasoning intuition (Anschauung) and feeling and central in philo¬
sophy, and the very being of the Absolute itself.

7- These latter views arise from the disillusioned desire to return
to the peace and security of unquestioning faith which philosophical
thinking has rudely shattered. They demand a suppression of thought-



496


ANALYSIS


distinctions, not their further clarification. They aim at edification
and enthusiasm rather than cool insight.

8. Such views are an attempt to return to the heaven-directed gaze
of earlier eras of thought, which has been succeeded by a gaze directed
only to empirical detail, which now stultifies and starves the Spirit.

9. True Science cannot, however, be satisfied to see all detail vanish
in an insubstantial, edifying mist.

10. The complacency which spurns as finite the exactly defined
concepts and necessary connections of Science, is not above but below
the level of Science. Its would-be profundities are empty, its sweeping
assertions superficial, its prophetic pronouncements arbitrary and
superficial.

11. Our own time is obviously ripe for a major intellectual and
spiritual advance. This has been ‘in the womb’ for a long time, and
is now about to achieve birth. Its birth-pangs are felt in a widespread
sense of disillusion and frivolity, and in the vague foreboding of some¬
thing unknown at hand.

12. A new scientific spirit is at first only present in general, notional
germ. It is the product of an extensive, laborious transformation of
previous cultural forms, and their resumption into a new simplicity.
It must, to be fully actual, redevelop these forms out of this simple
unity.

13* Science, in its new, notional form, as yet ill worked out and
ill connected with the rich detail of past thinking, seems to be the
obscure possession of an esoteric sect. To be generally intelligible and
exoteric, it must connect all this past detail with its new position. To
understand is to make familiar material one's own by incorporating
it in a new scientific structure.


14- When Science first emerges, it has on the one hand a tendency
to stress simple intuitive rationality and a relation to what is divine,

Ut fi!° r j ^ ot ^ er band to develop this insight into an organized
wea t of detail. The second tendency may be held in check by the
FSt ’ cont inues with justification to demand satisfaction.

be tendency towards detail may try to satisfy itself by merely
running through familiarly organized material, adding to this much
a is extraordinary and curious, and then mechanically applying
e same absolute idea’ to all such detail without the least modifica-
lon to suit special cases. This is a monotonous formalism, applicable
only to ready-made differences.

16. The false absolutism just sketched fails to develop difference
e ^ a . 1 out itself, but thinks it has done its task when it has said
o anyt ing specific that it is not to be found in the Absolute, since
there we have only the Absolute’s identity with self. Such an Absolute
is t e night in which every cow is black. As opposed to such a false


497


 , §§8-22

absolutism, it will be helpful to give a sketch of a true one. (Aimed
at Schelling, but obviously applying to others as well.)

17. In my view, which the full exposition of my system alone can
justify, the true Absolute must not merely be thought of as a Sub¬
stance, i.e. something immediately there, whether this be a knower
or something known. It must be thought of as a Subject. We think
in terms of Substance if we think in terms of undifferentiated uni¬
versality, whether this be that of what merely is, or of what merely
thinks, or of what (a la Schelling) combines both in a single
intellectual intuition.

18. True Substance is a being that truly is Subject, i.e. which only is
itself in so far as it alienates itself from itself, and is then able to posit
itself in and through what is thus alien. It cannot exist as a simple,
positive starting-point, but only as part of a self-departing, self-return¬
ing movement, which both negates itself in indifferent, externa
otherness, and then reasserts itself as the negation of all such otherness.

19. The life and self-knowledge of the Absolute may well be de¬
scribed as that of the divine Love disporting itself with itself, but such
an image readily becomes insipid, or sinks into edification, since it
fails to emphasize the seriousness, the anguish, and the patient effort
involved in thus negating the negation. The essence of the Absolute
cannot be separated from its execution, nor its form from the full con¬
tent of its carrying-out.

20. The true Absolute can only be seen as the whole of a self-realiz¬
ing act or process, and is also the result or outcome of such an act
or process. What is present at its beginning can only be emptily uni¬
versal, and can only achieve specific content through connection with
what appears to be other than itself, but what can then be seen to
be not really other.

21. There is a horror of mediate connection which stems from a
misunderstanding of the role of mediation in absolute knowledge. For
mediation is merely the self-negation, and the negation of this nega¬
tion, involved in the self-identification of the Subject. The Subject
only becomes an immediate unity through the denial of its mediate
connection with something else. Reflection, or the going from one
thing to another, should not be abhorred: it is essential to the return
to self which annuls it.

22. What has been said amounts to saying that Reason is purposive
activity. External purpose has rightly been banished from natural
philosophy, but not so the self-moving purposiveness which is indist¬
inguishable from subjectivity. For in purpose the result or outcome
is one with its moving cause, which in departing from self realizes
self, and in which even the process of departing from self is a fulfilment
of self.



49#


ANALYSIS


23. Philosophical sentences, e.g. God is the moral order of the
world, illustrate the nature of the Absolute. For while they appear
to have fixed subjects to which predicates accrue externally, these sub¬
jects merely anticipate what is to be predicated of them, and only
acquire concrete significance when the predication is completed.
Predications analytically anticipated in the meaning of their subjects
make predication quite vacuous.

24. Philosophical knowledge is essentially systematic, and a philo¬
sophical first principle therefore at once refutes itself by being merely
a first principle. Being merely universal, merely initial, its further de¬
velopment is in a sense its own refutation, the clear exhibition of its
merely initial character.

25. That philosophical truth is necessarily systematic, that Sub¬
stance must be Subject, can be expressed by saying that the Absolute
is essentially Spirit, both in and for itself. It is at first only in and
for itself to philosophical reflection, and is then spiritual Substance,
or Spirit in itself. It must become in itself for itself, must come to know
Spirit, and itself as Spirit, i.e. must become its own object both imme¬
diately and reflectively. Spirit thus fully self-conscious is Science, i.e.
Spirit fully constituted for itself in its own element.

26. To know itself and be at home with itself in what is absolutely
other than itself, is the true ‘Aether 5 of Science. But for the ordinary
consciousness, which always opposes itself to its objects, J-ife in such

an ^ et n er seems to P s y- tury y and unreal. The thinking spirit must
gradually accustom itself to such topsy-turvy unreality.

« 2 7 -* £ enes ^. Science is the theme of the Phenomenology of

jurit. his genesis starts from Spirit immediate or spiritless Spirit,
i.e. rom t e consciousness of sense, and must tread a long road before
1 can ecome true Science, can give birth to its true concept or ele-
t n .‘ uc a £ enes is w *fl not be a fancied illumination of the road
of ;n lenCe ’ n ^ F ^ Ct an actua ^ founding of science, nor yet a pistol-shot
illuminanon aiming straight at absolute knowledge.

minH ; e if S P r °ceeding from the uncultured to the knowing
scions ^ ^ performed by the universal individual, i.e. self-con-

Dartial r Z as . suc k* Th e particular individual is merely a one-sided,
ernnhat’ X P r ^ sl ^ n °* tfus Spirit, an expression in which one trait is
howevT U underscored * The particular individual must,

versa I ; n f and repossess itself of all the phases of the uni-

of the * 1V1 ^ S P aSt deve fop nient * They will now be seen as part
viously demanded!" 6 * 16 ' requiring the dee P research that was pre-

j ^1 It,S ''"Possible to state the scientific outcome of all this cultural

Farti 0 ." 71601 w ’ t ^ out runr| ing through it patiently stage by stage.
Each stage on the route has been necessary, and has incarnated the



499


 , §§ 23-36

sense of the whole movement in one of its special phases. But such
a running-through is eased and abbreviated by the reduction of past
stages to explicit thoughts from being merely implicit existences.

30. Past stages have lost the immediacy of existence, but this loss
of existence is only a first negation which still retains the immediacy
of the mere presentation, the idea that is familiar, and has as such
been set aside. This first negation must itself be negated, and the fam¬
iliar idea brought back into the purview of the thinking self.

31. What is merely familiar is not as such properly known. To build
upon familiar concepts of subjectivity, objectivity, God, Nature, etc.,
without allowing these ideas to develop, is and remains irremediably
superficial.

32. The analysis of an idea is the removal of its familiarity, its re¬
duction to elements that are the true possessions of the thinking self.
In such reduction the idea itself changes and renders itself unreal.
The force which effects analysis is that of the Understanding, the most
remarkable and absolute of powers, the power of the thinking self
and also of death. It is above all marvellous that this thinking self
should be able to isolate, and to look at apart, what can only exist
as an aspect or ‘moment’ in a living whole. Thinking Spirit can, how¬
ever, only grasp such a whole by first tearing it into parts, each of
which it must look at separately for a while, before putting them back
in the whole. The thinking self must destroy an immediate, existent
unity in order to arrive at a unity which includes mediation, and is
in fact mediation itself.

33. Ancient thought differs from ours in that it built directly on
the natural consciousness, and reached out to the universal from it,
whereas our thought finds the universal lying ready to hand, in hard,
fixed form, which it then has to revitalize and restore to fluidity. So
vitalized, fixed ideas become self-moving notions, spiritual essentiali¬
ties.

34. Such a movement of pure essentialities is Science as such, whose
content is nothing but their necessary expansion into an organic
whole. The notion of Science does not arise out of contingent philoso¬
phizing on these or those themes, relations or common ideas, nor from
logical manipulations of these or those definite thoughts, but from
the rounding-itself-out of the self-moving concept into cosmic com¬
pleteness.

35. The exposition to be given in the present work is therefore the
first part of Science, in that Spirit’s first existence is merely the begin¬
ning in which it has not yet returned to self. Existential immediacy
distinguishes this part of the system. This leads us on to comment on
certain fixed ideas which occur in this context.

36. Consciousness, the immediate existence of Spirit, always em-



500


ANALYSIS


braces two opposed factors: the element of knowledge and that of
objectivity. Together these constitute the experience of Spirit, and
there is nothing in the objective Substance given in experience but what
falls within such experience. Spirit, however, itself underlies the objec¬
tivity which at first confronts it as alien, and which is then repossessed
and seen as its own.

37. The disparity between the self and the objective Substance is
the void which inspires their movement towards one another. The
ancients rightly made the void a principle of motion. The disparity
between self and object is at once an inadequacy of the self in under¬
standing the object, and an inadequacy of the object to itself. When
the object is fully itself, i.e. fully revealed, the subject-object dis¬
tinction vanishes and Phenomenology yields place to Logic.

38. There is a temptation to think that, since the standpoint of
Phenomenology is superseded as false in the standpoint of Logic, it
would have been better to have dispensed with it, and have gone
straight to Logic. This argues a false view of truth and of its relation
to what is false.

39- Falsehood is not simply the slag or dross which must be rejected
to arrive at truth: it is the unshaped metal which must be reshaped
and refined into truth, and which is necessarily present in the final
shape of such truth.

40. The philosophical dogmatist thinks we can pronounce defini¬
tively on a philosophical issue as we can pronounce on the date of
Caesar s birth or on the equality of the square on a triangle’s hypo¬
tenuse to the two squares on its other two sides.

4 1 - The truths of history, to the extent that they are contingent,
and concern particular existents, are indeed naked matters of fact,
which nothing renders necessary. Even here, however, there are
grounds for and against, so that error becomes part of truth.

42. Mathematical truths are not thought 'to be known unless
proved true. Their demonstrations are not, however, kept as parts
? Wthe y P r ove, but are only our subjective means towards know-
mg t e atter. In philosophy, however, consequences always form part
ol the essence made manifest in them, which returns to itself in such
expressions.

43. Mathematical insights, employing constructions and proofs,
ave to that extent always something false about them. We depart
rom the triangle in incorporating its parts into other figures, and we

only come back to it in the end.

44. Mathematical knowledge is defective in that lines of proof and
constructions have to be blindly tried out till we hit on one that leads
to the desired conclusion. They are not consequences of the notional
content of the theorem to be established.


 , §§37-50


501


45. Mathematics may plume itself on its self-evidence, but this self¬
evidence rests on the poverty of its aim and the defectiveness of its
material, in which philosophy should be ashamed to follow it. Mathe¬
matics only seeks to establish quantitative relations which belong ex¬
clusively to the surface of things. Its materials are space and the unit, an
empty, lifeless, repetitive element, set forth in fixed, dead propositions,
linked together only by equational identities, and never progressing
through opposition to some qualitatively different outcome. The in¬
commensurability of the different dimensions, which for mathematics
constitutes a problem, is a luminous necessity to the philosopher.

46. Mathematics is wholly unsuccessful in its treatment of time,
which it does not see as standing in a relation of necessary opposition
and complementarity to space. Its proofs of the equalization of
moments in the lever, and of the relations of time and space in gravita¬
tion, are pitifully empirical. Time with its essential, living self-dif-
ferentiatign, is the very Notion present in actual existence. The
notionless quantities and equations of mathematics are unable to
capture its essence.

47. Philosophy does not move in the inert, abstract, unreal medium
of mathematics, but in an actual, living progression of distinct
notional phases, some of which negate what went before, and are
themselves negated in what follows, but are all necessary steps in the
progression, and are recalled in its final conclusion. Philosophical
truth is like a Bacchanalian riot where the drunken participants fall
down as they try to stand up, but it is also like the enlaced final sleep
in which all have collapsed on to the floor.

48. The method of philosophy must be set forth by Logic, and is
in fact Logic itself. It is not the method of mathematics, with its defini¬
tions, axioms, theorems, proofs, grounds pro and contra etc., which
deals externally with its materials, and does not seek to develop their
inner content. Mathematical methods are suited to their abstract
materials, and to the fixed identities of concrete sensuous things,
which do not change as we consider them.

49. But if philosophy steers clear of the loose methods of ordinary
argument and the exact methods of mathematics, it must not therefore
let itself sink back into prophetic divinations and enthusiasms which
are not scientific at all.

50. Kant has brought back into philosophy the dialectical triplicity
which is the essential form of Science. But neither he nor his successors
have been able to give it life. They have treated it as an inert schema,
and have applied it to the most heterogeneous materials, sometimes
grossly empirical, sometimes categorial and notional. Such applica¬
tions are as void of deep sense as are the category-headings of ordinary
chatter.


5°2


ANALYSIS


51. Such unthinking application of the same schema to quite dif¬
ferent materials is a pure formalism, though it may call itself a con¬
struction. It makes use throughout of a wild series of analogical identi¬
fications. The Understanding is linked to electricity, the animal to
nitrogen, and so on. There is an appearance of conceptual connection
where none is really present. The procedure resembles that of a poor
painter who depicts everything in two colours, or, worse still, in one.

52. It is, however, only because dialectical triplicity is felt to be
the essential form of Science that it is thus devitalized and abused.

53. True Science is nothing but the self-development of the Notion,
which first confronts its owmsimple universality with a specific, objec¬
tive other, then takes back the sense of that other into its own sim¬
plicity, thereby becoming more determinate. The schematizing
Understanding merely catalogues and tables the stages of such self¬
development, without knowing what they amount to, nor the prin¬
ciple of their growth.

54. Every qualitative nuance of being has its own abstracted self-
identity, which is one with the abstract self-identity of a distinct
thought. This self-identical, qualitative nuance necessarily brings
about its own dissolution, and becomes a mere moment in a wider
whole. But this dissolution is not brought about by some alien process
of reflection, but is cunningly contrived by the objective content itself,
which to preserve itself must move beyond itself. The thought that
sees this does not progress by a retreat into subjectivity, but by
immersing itself in its object’s own development.

55. The abstractive Understanding is not only an aspect of self-
conscious subjectivity, but also of existent being. Existence means dis¬
tinction in quality: this is the Understanding of existence, what Anax¬
agoras called its Nous, and what later thinkers raised to the status
of an Eidos or Idea or sort. But such a self-identical, distinct sort in¬
volves its own dissolution: it may seem to be destroyed by alien vio¬
lence, but is in fact destroyed by the negation, the reference to
another, which it bears within itself. In such becoming the Under¬
standing-aspect of being passes over into its Reason.

56. The being of anything is one with its Notion, and this Notion
is at once the necessity of its rhythmic development and the specula¬
tive concept which enables us to know it. It is not necessary to apply
speculative categories to what concretely is, since the latter already
embodies such categories in itself.

57. The scientific method of speculative philosophy will show itself
to be at once determined by the contents it studies and by its own
inherent rhythms. If it is described as we have just described it, resist¬
ance will be aroused from the standpoint both of sound common sense
and ofmystical insight. This is the standard response to what seems an



 , §§51-65 503

alien dogma: men prefer to be revolutionary in their own time and
manner.

58. To think in pure Notions, e.g. self-identity, being-in-itself,
being-for-self, is tiresome and difficult, both to the thought that prefers
to think in pictures, in which what is universal is not clearly
abstracted, and to merely argumentative thought, which does not im¬
merse itself in its thought-content at all, but satisfies its vanity by
pronouncing upon it rather than by allowing it to develop.

59. Argumentative thinking delights in refuting a conceptual con¬
tent and reducing it to nothing. Such negative reflection is as vain
and empty as the content it refutes. It is quite different from the con¬
structive negation which always has a positive outcome.

60. Argumentative thinking connects the content it thinks of with
its own selfas judging Subject. The determination of subject by predi¬
cate seems to it to be its own free doing. But the thought which
achieves grasp of its subject only does so when its round of predication
is complete. It discovers its subject only in being forced to enlarge
its predications, and not in its original reference. But picture-thought,
concerned only with points of reference and with what is accidental,
resents having to revise its content as it goes along. The revision of
the logical subject, however, means the emergence of the thinking
Subject, which finds itself in developing the content of the logical sub¬
ject through various predications, and not in some arbitrary
reference-point of which arbitrary predications are made. (Paragraph
very difficult owing to identification-in-distinction of the conscious
with the logico-grammatical subject.)

61. The conflict we have here is that of the superficial view of the
proposition of judgement, which treats it as an external connection
of independently significant elements, and of the speculative view
which sees it as the self-development, through complementary dif¬
ferences, of a single significant content.

62. It is hard for an argumentative thinker to realize that, until
he has decided what has to be said of a given logical subject, e.g. God
in his relation to being, he is not truly concerning himself with subject
of reference nor with any subject at all.

63. From this springs the objection to philosophical statements that
they have to be read over many times before they can be understood.
A comfortable enlargement of a familiar subject by the mere addition
of predicates has ceased to be possible.

64. To mix argumentative thinking with speculative dialectic can
never succeed, since the fixed points of reference necessary for the
former are lacking in the latter.

65. Speculative dialectic does not merely dispense with the fixed
distinctions of argumentative thought in some high flight of insight.





504


ANALYSIS


It shows them breaking down as it reflects on the intrinsic sense of
propositions.

66. Speculative dialectic must itself be expounded in propositions,
and this might seem to expose it to the same objections as argumenta¬
tive thought, and to open the way to a critique of speculation. But
the propositional form is a mere shell in speculation, since its predica¬
tions are not meant to be externally added to an already fixed subject
of reference. For this reason names like ‘God’ with a conventionally
fixed content are best avoided in philosophy.

67. It is not thought necessary to have a preliminary training
before one philosophizes: ordinary information, skills, methods are
thought sufficient. But since nothing can be taken for granted until
tested by philosophy, philosophy involves its own skills and standards
which have to be learnt ^and practised.

68. Thought incapable of considering abstract propositions or their
mutual relations should not be confused with tolerance and freedom
of mind, much less with inspired genius. Inexact, undisciplined think¬
ing has all the defects of poetry without its merits.

69. To be a naturalist or a common-sense philosopher is to revert
to trivialities that it requires no philosopher to utter. Such trivialities
always lead on to antinomies which are neither sophistical nor
visionary. To refuse to engage in justifications and analyses is to abdi¬
cate human rationality.

70. To rely on common sense supplemented by a little reading of
philosophical prefaces and reviews is an easy road to Science. Science,
however, requires that truth should be won by the labour of the
Notion developing itself in its own medium.

71. Though there have been many who value Plato for his literary
myths, there have been times when his Parmenides has been seen to
be the supreme work of art of the ancient dialectic, and the positive
expression of the divine life. There have been times, too, when the
philosophy of Aristotle was valued for its speculative depth. We may
hope that our system will penetrate public attention, since it has had
to wait till its time was ripe and its public in existence. This public
does not consist of the soi-disant representatives of public opinion.

72. In our age the universal aspect of Spirit has been strengthened,
while its individual expressions are less significant. In such an age
the individual must lorget his individuality and must do what he can,
while less should also be demanded of him by society.
